48

The $30 trillion decathlon:  
How consumer companies can win in 
emerging markets

By 2025, annual consumption in emerging markets will reach $30 trillion. 
Companies must master ten key disciplines—or miss the defining growth 
opportunity of our time.

Yuval Atsmon, 

Peter Child, and 

Udo Kopka

CEOs at most large multinational companies say 

compared with just 10 percent for the 37 North 

they recognize the importance of the rise of 

American companies. But the companies in both 

middle-class consumers in emerging markets. Yet 

regions fail to come close to realizing the full 

those same executives are vexed by the complexity 

potential of the emerging-market opportunity. 

of this opportunity. In 2010, 100 of the world’s 

largest companies headquartered in developed 

Our experience suggests that the challenge in 

economies derived just 17 percent of their total 

emerging markets resembles a decathlon, where 

revenue from emerging markets—even though 

success comes from all-around excellence in 

those markets accounted for 36 percent of global 

multiple sports. Sitting out an event isn’t an 

GDP and are likely to contribute more than 70 

option; competing effectively means mastering a 

percent of global GDP growth between now and 

variety of capabilities. In emerging markets, 

2025. Western European companies fared slightly 

companies, like athletes, must learn to make 

better than their North American counterparts: 

trade-offs, taking into account their own 

the 39 Western European companies among the 

capabilities and those of competitors. The 

100 largest advanced-economy companies earned 

rewards for success and the costs of failure will 

25 percent of revenues from emerging markets 

be large.

49

The $30 trillion opportunity 

Over the past two decades, the number of people 
earning more than $10 a day1—roughly the level at 
which households can contemplate discretionary 

changes in mind-sets, capabilities, and resource 

allocation. With the help of colleagues, we’ve 

distilled a set of ten capabilities global 

corporations need in emerging markets. Just as 

purchases of products such as refrigerators and 

winning a decathlon requires an athlete to master 

Keiko Morimoto

TVs—has more than doubled, to 2.4 billion people. 

ten events, winning in emerging markets requires 

McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) research 

companies to master the following ten capabilities. 

suggests that by 2025 that number will nearly 
double again, to 4.2 billion consumers.2  

1. Surgically target urban growth clusters 

The scale of the modern exodus from farms to 

1 On a purchasing-power-parity 
basis.
2 Richard Dobbs, James 
Manyika, Jaana Remes, 
Charles Roxburgh, Fabian 
Schaer, and Sven Smit, Urban 
World: Cities and the Rise of 
the Consuming Class, 
McKinsey Global Institute, 
June 2012.
3 The estimate of $30 trillion 
ref lects private consumption 
in emerging-market regions 
in 2025. The regions included 
are Africa, Central Asia, 
China (with Hong Kong and 
Taiwan), Eastern Europe, 
Latin America, the Middle 
East, and South and 
Southeast Asia. Emerging-
market consumption in 2025 
is estimated by applying the 
private-consumption share of 
GDP per country to national 
GDP estimates for 2025, 
calculated on the basis of 
consensus GDP growth 
projections from the 
Economist Intelligence Unit, 
Global Insight, Oxford 
Economics, and McKinsey’s 
long-term growth model. This 
approach implicitly assumes 
that private consumption as a 
share of GDP will remain 
constant through 2025. Past 
evidence from developed 
economies suggests the share 
of private consumption in 
many countries will increase 
with income, which would 
lead to a higher projected 
level of emerging-market 
consumption in 2025.
4 These companies include Del 
Monte Foods, which led in 
canned fruit; Nabisco, which 
led in biscuits; and Wrigley, 
which led in chewing gum.

The overwhelming majority of these new 

urban areas has no precedent. The population of 

consumers will hail from emerging markets. MGI 

cities in developing economies grows by at least 

estimates that by 2025 annual consumption in 

65 million a year—the equivalent of seven cities 

emerging markets will rise to $30 trillion and 

the size of Chicago. Over the next 15 years, just 

account for nearly 50 percent of the world’s total 
(Exhibit 1).3 Even under the most pessimistic 
scenarios for global growth, emerging markets 

440 emerging-market cities will generate nearly 

half of global GDP growth.

are likely to outperform developed economies 

Midsize cities frequently offer the best 

significantly for decades.

opportunities. In Brazil, for instance, competition 

in the metropolitan market of São Paulo is brutal 

Leading the way is a generation of consumers in 

and retail margins are razor thin. New entrants to 

their 20s and early 30s who are confident their 

the Brazilian market might find better options in 

incomes will rise and are willing to spend in order 

the northeast, Brazil’s populous but historically 

to realize their high aspirations. These new 

poorest region, where boomtowns like 

consumers have come of age in the digital era. 

Parauapebas are growing by as much as 20 

Already, more than half of all Internet users 

percent a year. 

globally are in emerging markets. Emerging 

consumers are shaping the digital revolution, not 

The notion that smaller cities can offer bigger 

just participating in it, and they are leapfrogging 

opportunities isn’t new. Fifty years ago, Wal-

developed-market norms. 

Mart opened its first store in Rogers, Arkansas, 

and proceeded to build one of the world’s largest 

Companies failing to pursue these consumers will 

businesses by avoiding highly competitive 

squander opportunities to build positions of strength 

metropolitan markets. Many multinationals 

that, history suggests, could be long lasting: in 17 

nonetheless assume that developing local 

major product categories in the United States, the 

strategies for “middleweight” cities can come 

market leader in 1925 remained the number-one or 
number-two player for the rest of the century.4 

only at the expense of economies of scale. To 

minimize that trade-off, global companies 

Ten crucial capabilities 

should group smaller cities into clusters with 

common demographics, income distributions, 

For developed-market companies, winning in 

cultural characteristics, media markets, and 

these high-growth markets requires radical 

transportation links. Exhibit 2 shows urban 

50

Compendium
$30 trillion decathlon
Exhibit 2 of 5

Exhibit 1

By 2025, the consuming class will swell to 4.2 billion people. 
Consumption in emerging markets will account for $30 trillion—
nearly half of the global total. 

World population, billions

World consumption, $ trillion

6.8

2.4

4.4

5.2

1.2

4.0

7.9

4.2

3.7

Consuming 
class1

Below 
consuming 
class1

0.3

2.5

2.2

3.7
0.9

2.8

64

30

Emerging 
markets 

34

Developed 
markets

38

12

26

1950

1970

1990

2010

20252

2010

20253

1Consuming class: daily disposable income is ≥$10; below consuming class, <$10; incomes adjusted for purchasing-power parity.
2Projected. 
3Estimate based on 2010 private-consumption share of GDP per country and GDP estimates for 2010 and 2025; assumes private 
consumption’s share of GDP will remain constant.

  Source: Angus Maddison, founder of Groningen Growth and Development Centre, University of Groningen; Homi Kharas, senior fellow at 
Wolfensohn Center for Development at Brookings Institution; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

clusters in China. By running operations 

incomes rise, a “hot zone” where consumers have 

through a common management hub and 

enough money to buy a product, and a “chill-out 

pursuing gradual, cluster-by-cluster expansion, 

zone” in which demand eases (Exhibit 3).

companies can gain scale efficiencies in all 

aspects of their operations, including marketing, 

In plotting consumption S-curves, per capita 

logistics, supply-chain management, and 

income is the critical variable. But the takeoff 

distribution. For all but a handful of high-end 

point and shape of consumption curves varies 

product and service categories, the emphasis 

by product or service. Purchases of products 

should be on “going deep” before “going wide.”

with low unit costs, such as snacks and bottled 

drinks, accelerate at a relatively early stage of 

2. Anticipate moments of explosive growth 

the income curve, beauty products somewhat 

In emerging markets, timing matters as much as 

later, and luxury products later still. 

geography in choosing where to compete. Demand 

Refrigerators tend to have a steep adoption 

for a particular product or category of products 

curve that flattens out as the market reaches 

typically follows an S-curve: there is a “warm-up 

saturation, while spending on clothing displays 

zone” as growth gathers steam and consumer 

a more sustained growth pattern. 

Perspectives on retail and consumer goods Spring 2013The $30 trillion decathlon: How consumer companies can win in emerging markets

51

Compendium
$30 trillion decathlon
Exhibit 3 of 5

Exhibit 2

A clustering approach can help companies target consumers 
more effectively in Chinese cities, some of which are economically 
larger than entire European countries.

2010 GDP for urban clusters in China vs 
selected countries, $ billion

Shanghai

Switzerland

Jingjinji

Belgium

Shandong

Norway

Austria

Guangzhou

Denmark

527

527

475

469

418

413

378

357

310

Urban clusters in China and their hub cities

Clusters are grouped by size, based on 
average 2015 urban GDP estimates

Small

Large

Mega

Jingjinji 
cluster

Beijing

Shijiazhuang 

Hohhot

Harbin 

Changchun 

Shenyang 

Dalian 

Tianjin 

Shandong Byland 
cluster

Taiyuan 

Zhengzhou 
Xi’an 

Guanzhong cluster

Hefei 

Wuhan

Chengdu 

Chongqing 

Kunming 

Changsha 

Nanning 

Shenzhen 

Qingdao 

Jinan 

Nanjing 

Shanghai 

Hangzhou 

Nanchang 

Fuzhou 

Xiamen 

Guangzhou 

52

Compendium
$30 trillion decathlon
Exhibit 4 of 5

Exhibit 3

In China, consumption of household products takes off at 
middle-income levels, following an S-curve.

Annual consumption of household products1 by city in 2010,
thousand renminbi per household2

Low income

Middle income

High income

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

Dongguan

Guangzhou

Zhuhai

Shanghai

Chongqing

Shantou

Dongsheng

Foshan

Shenzhen

Baotou

Wenzhou

Quanzhou

Lanzhou

Nehe

Kunming

Taiyuan

Zhoushan

0

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70 75 80 85

90

95

100

105

110

115

120

125

130 135 140 145 150

Annual household disposable income by city in 2010,
thousand renminbi per household2

1 Includes white goods, furniture, and home accessories.
2In 2010 real renminbi; 6.77 renminbi = $1 in 2010.

  Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China; McKinsey analysis

Adoption patterns of products within the same 

understanding of technological, demographic, 

general category can vary widely, too. For 

cultural, geographic, and regulatory trends, as 

example, in Beijing, purchases of refrigerators 

well as a thorough knowledge of local 

start to take off at annual incomes of $2,500 a 

distribution networks. Because many of India’s 

year but slow above $6,000, while the acceleration 

households are vegetarian, for example, meat 

for washing machines doesn’t begin until incomes 

consumption there is much lower than the global 

approach $10,000.

average. In China, rising incomes, greater 

awareness of the benefits of baby formula, and 

Predicting when and where consumers will move 

concerns about the safety of low-end brands 

into the hot zone requires a granular 

have helped make baby food the fastest-growing 

Perspectives on retail and consumer goods Spring 2013The $30 trillion decathlon: How consumer companies can win in emerging markets

53

product category in the supermarket sector. 

4. Radically redeploy resources for the long term 

Between 2000 and 2010, annual sales of baby 

Our research shows that emerging-market 

formula in China soared from RMB 6 billion to 

companies redeploy investment across business 

RMB 36 billion, despite the number of births 

units at much higher rates than their developed-

remaining stagnant at 16 million a year.

market counterparts and are growing faster than 

3. Devise segmentation strategies for local 

based. Emerging players’ growth advantage 

relevance and global scale 

persists even after controlling for the smaller base 

Multinationals must refine product or service 

offerings to appeal to (or even shape) local tastes, be 

from which they start, and it also exists in 
developed markets.6 

them, even in neutral markets where neither is 

affordable, and allow the company to achieve 

reasonable scale quickly. Too often, multinationals 

In part, the agility of emerging-market companies 

paint emerging-market consumers as caricatures: at 

reflects the fact that they don’t have to straddle 

one extreme is the nouveau riche, eager to flaunt its 

the rich and developing worlds. By contrast, CEOs 

wealth and emulate the West; at the other is the 

at multinationals must protect their flank at home 

penny-pinching poor, for whom the overriding 

as they pursue emerging markets that carry 

purchase criterion is getting the lowest price. With 

significant near-term risks. The investment 

the number of mainstream consumers on the rise in 

profile of global consumer-products giants with a 

emerging markets—more than half of all Chinese 

successful presence in emerging markets 

urban households, for example, will be solidly 

indicates an interval of approximately four to five 

middle class by 2020, up from 6 percent in 2010—

years until investments pay off. M&A can 

companies are learning to craft more nuanced 
product strategies.5 

accelerate progress. Consider Danone’s purchase 

in Russia of Unimilk, which allowed the French 

food giant to offer products at a wider variety of 

A careful segmentation strategy helped Frito-Lay 

prices. Similarly, Diageo’s acquisition of a 

capture more than 40 percent of the branded-

majority stake in China’s Shui Jing Fang boosted 

snacks market in India. The company tailored 

the British beverage company’s distribution reach.

global products, such as Lay’s and Cheetos, to 

local tastes. Frito-Lay also created Kurkure, a 

5. Innovate to deliver value across the price 

cross between traditional Indian street food and 

spectrum 

Western-style potato chips. Kurkure established a 

Emerging markets offer opportunities to design 

new category in India and is now being sold in 

products and services with innovative local twists. 

other countries. Attractive pricing and local feel, 

South Korea’s LG Electronics, for instance, 

combined with scalable international packaging, 

struggled in India until the 1990s, when a change 

were critical to Kurkure’s success.

in foreign-investment rules enabled the company 

to invest in local design and manufacturing 

Leading companies also look for opportunities to 

facilities. Local employees, recognizing that many 

scale ideas across emerging markets. Unilever, for 

Indians use their TVs to listen to music, urged LG 

example, markets its Pureit water filter, first 

to introduce new models with better speakers. To 

launched in India in 2005, to consumers in Asia, 

keep prices competitive, the company swapped 

Eastern Europe, and South Africa.

flat-panel displays for less costly cathode-ray tubes.

5 We define mainstream 
consumers in China as members 
of relatively well-to-do 
households, with annual 
disposable incomes of $16,000 
to $34,000. For more on China’s 
mainstream consumers, see 
Yuval Atsmon and Max Magni, 
“Meet the Chinese consumer of 
2020,” mckinseyquarterly.com, 
March 2012.
6 For example, in emerging 
economies where both 
categories of companies are off 
their home turf, the growth 
advantage for emerging-market 
companies is 18.1 percent. In 
neutral developed markets, the 
advantage is 10.7 percent. The 
smaller size of emerging-market 
businesses accounts for, on 
average, no more than a quarter 
of the overall growth 
differential. For more on this 
research, see Sumit Dora, Sven 
Smit, and Patrick Viguerie, 
“Drawing a new road map for 
growth,” mckinseyquarterly 
.com, April 2011 and Yuval 
Atsmon, Michael Kloss, and 
Sven Smit, “Parsing the growth 
advantage of emerging-market 
companies,” mckinseyquarterly 
.com, May 2012.

54

Today, LG markets many other original products 

brands and end up purchasing one of them about 

in India, such as microwaves with one-touch 

60 percent of the time, whereas consumers in the 

“Indian menu” functions. LG’s product-innovation 

United States and Europe initially consider at 

center in Bangalore is its largest outside South 

least four brands and select one of them only 30 to 

Korea, and the company is India’s market leader 

40 percent of the time. Emerging consumers’ 

in air conditioners, refrigerators, TVs, and 

focus on the initial consideration set favors 

washing machines. Others have followed LG’s lead 

brands with high visibility and an aura of trust. 

and opened research facilities in emerging 

Multinationals can build visibility with a cluster-

markets: between 1999 and 2008, the number of 

by-cluster strategy that achieves top-of-mind 

multinational companies with major research 

recognition in a handful of selected cities before 

centers in China rose to approximately 1,000, 

moving to the next batch. Locally focused 

from fewer than 40. 

campaigns also make it easier to generate positive 

Local players too are proving nimble innovators. 

product recommendations from friends or family 

For rural customers, China’s Haier makes 

are twice as important for consumers in China 

extra-durable washing machines that can wash 

and nearly three times as important for 

vegetables as well as clothes, and refrigerators 

consumers in Egypt as for those in the United 

word-of-mouth. McKinsey surveys find that 

with protective metal plates and bite-proof wiring 

States and Britain.

to guard against mice. Dabur, an Indian 

consumer-health company, combines Western 

Mobile and digital channels offer additional 

science with Indian Ayurvedic medicine to offer 

opportunities to build trust and brand awareness. 

innovative products in India and many other 

Surveys indicate Chinese consumers are more 

markets. Tanishq, part of the Tata Group, has 

likely to trust online recommendations than TV 

built a fast-growing jewelry business with 

advertisements. Brazilians are among the world’s 

localized design and payment options that cater to 

most enthusiastic tweeters; by 2010, a quarter of 

different Indian communities and regions.

Internet users in Brazil had opened Twitter 

6. Build brands that resonate and inspire trust 

mobile devices, while low literacy rates are 

On average, emerging-market consumers are 

spurring the development of voice-activated Web 

accounts. In India, consumers are embracing 

younger, with 63 percent aged 35 or under in 2010, 

sites and services. 

versus 43 percent in developed countries. And they 

are highly receptive to branding efforts but also far 

In Beijing in 2011, the global condom brand 

more likely than developed-market consumers to 

Durex discovered the Web’s extraordinary 

dump one brand for the next new thing. 

potential. During a rainstorm, a Durex social-

media marketer stretched condoms over his 

These characteristics have significant implications 

sneakers to keep them dry. Colleagues posted 

for brand and marketing strategies. In emerging 

photos online with the caption, “Crazy rain! 

markets, it is critical for products to be included 

Luckily I had a couple of Durex!” The post went 

in consumers’ initial consideration sets (the short 

viral, reaching 80,000 people in its first 24 hours 

list of brands they might purchase). Chinese 

and generating coverage in the mainstream 

consumers initially consider an average of three 

press. At virtually no cost, the post raised brand 

Perspectives on retail and consumer goods Spring 2013The $30 trillion decathlon: How consumer companies can win in emerging markets

55

awareness and created a witty and irreverent 
brand image for Durex.7 

outlet type. For each outlet type, Coca-Cola 

generates a “picture of success”—a detailed 

7. Shape the route to market 

description of how its products should be 

displayed, promoted, and priced. In China, 

Our research underscores the importance of 

Coca-Cola sells directly to over 40 percent of its 

the in-store experience. In China, 45 percent of 

two million retail outlets and monitors execution 

consumers make purchasing decisions inside 

in an additional 20 to 30 percent through regular 

shops, compared with 24 percent in the United 

visits by Coca-Cola salespeople and 

States. Almost a quarter of the Chinese 

merchandisers. In Africa, Coca-Cola has built a 

consumers we surveyed said in-store 

network of 3,200 “microdistributors”—

promoters or salespeople greatly inf luence 

entrepreneurs who use pushcarts and bicycles to 

their decisions. 

deliver products to hard-to-reach outlets. 

Managing the in-store experience is an enormous 

Companies must also develop capabilities to serve 

challenge, in part because of the fragmented retail 

online retailers or build their own online sales 

landscape. China’s 50 largest retailers have only a 

platforms. In China, online sales in many product 

tenth of the market share of the 50 largest US 

categories are growing explosively. One of China’s 

retailers. Reaching small outlets often means 

largest retailers, Suning, said it aims to boost 

negotiating bad roads and a byzantine, multitiered 

online sales to 45 percent of total revenue by 2020, 

network of distributors and wholesalers. In these 

up from 7 percent today. 

locations, local champions have clear advantages, 

including long-standing alliances with distributors 

8. Organize today for the markets of tomorrow 

and armies of low-paid salespeople. Multinationals 

As global companies grow bigger, the costs of 

should be prepared to build a much larger in-house 

coping with complexity rise sharply. Less than 40 

sales operation in these countries than they have in 

percent of the executives at global companies 

their home markets. They should also devote far 

surveyed recently by McKinsey’s organization 

more time and energy to segmenting sales outlets 

practice said they were better than local 

and devising precise routines and checklists for 

competitors at understanding the operating 

monitoring the in-store experience. 

environment and customers’ needs. Furthermore, 

adhering to standard policies and practices 

In India, Unilever distributes directly to more 

sometimes hinders managers of global companies 

than 1.5 million stores by deploying thousands of 

in emerging markets from moving quickly to lock 

people for sales and in-store merchandising, many 

in early opportunities.

equipped with handheld devices. For priority 

outlets, a heavy-control model—using supervisors, 

“mystery shoppers,” and sophisticated IT support—

is often essential. Coca-Cola, long active 

There’s no definitive solution to these challenges, 
but some important principles are emerging.8  For 
example, we’ve found that multinationals can 

throughout the developing world, goes to great 

boost their effectiveness by focusing on a few key 

lengths to analyze the range of retail outlets, 

management processes for which global 

identify the highest-priority stores, and 

consistency is advantageous, while allowing 

understand differences in service requirements by 

variability in others. Grouping high-growth 

7 “Durex microblog in China—
surprisingly [sic] success,” 
Marketing 555, January 26, 
2012 (marketing555 
.wordpress.com).
8 See Martin Dewhurst, 
Jonathan Harris, and 
Suzanne Heywood, “The 
global company’s challenge,” 
mckinseyquarterly.com,  
June 2012.

56

countries together (even when not geographically 

managers, improving working hours, expanding 

proximate) might help top management assess 

the child-care infrastructure, and adopting a 

their needs. Clarifying the role of the corporate 

more open communication style.

center is critical; too often, headquarters assumes 

functions that add complexity but little value. New 

Deepening ties between corporate functions and 

communications technologies can help, but 

emerging markets can create opportunities for 

management must ensure they do not ensnare 

local talent while enhancing organizational 

employees in an ever-expanding web of 

effectiveness. In 2010, about 200 managers from 

teleconferences in disorienting time slots, with 

Unilever’s Indian subsidiary were assigned global 

hazy agendas and ill-defined decision rights. The 

roles. At Yum Brands, the leader of the Indian 

farther flung the organization, the greater the 

organization reports to the global CEO.

virtue of simplicity.

Global companies need bold talent-development 

9. Turbocharge the drive for emerging-market 

targets. We think many players should aspire to 

talent 

multiply the number of leaders in emerging 

Unskilled workers may be plentiful in emerging 

markets tenfold—and to do that in one-tenth of 

societies, but skilled managers are scarce and 

the time they would take back home. In India, 

hard to retain. Global companies must develop 

Reliance Group, one of the country’s largest 

clear value propositions for talent—an employer 

private employers, addressed a need for as many 

brand, if you will—to differentiate themselves. In 

as 200 new functional leaders by recruiting a 

South Korea, L’Oréal established itself as a top 

wave of 28- to 34-year-old managers and enlisting 

choice for female sales and marketing talent by 

help from local business schools and management 

creating greater opportunities for brand 

experts to design new development programs. 

Perspectives on retail and consumer goods Spring 2013The $30 trillion decathlon: How consumer companies can win in emerging markets

57

10. Lock in the support of key stakeholders 

adjustments to its practices to comply with 

Successful businesses need the support of key 

regulations. Today Amway is China’s second-

stakeholders in government, civil society, and the 

largest consumer-products business. 

local media (increasingly shaped by online 

commentators). We believe global companies 

must devote far more time and effort to building 

such support in emerging markets than they 

As senior leaders commit to priority emerging 

would in developed ones. Such efforts should 

markets, they must reassure stakeholders that 

include cultivating relationships with local 

this commitment won’t come at the expense of 

business allies—customers, joint-venture partners, 

domestic performance. One thing that can help is 

investors, and suppliers.

developing clear metrics for tracking success in 

emerging markets—for example, year-on-year 

Amway’s success in China illustrates the benefits 

comparisons of market share in critical urban 

of effective stakeholder management. In the early 

clusters—which can reveal any need for course 

2000s, the US-based direct-sales giant was 

corrections. 

almost declared an illegal business in China for 

violating a 1998 ban on direct selling. Amway’s 

During the next 100 years, the companies looked 

senior executives made numerous visits to Beijing 

to as the world’s greatest will surely be those that 

to get to know senior leaders and explain the 

win in emerging markets. Business leaders must 

company’s business model. It also demonstrated 

make the changes required to win or risk being 

its commitment to China by opening stores 

overtaken by competitors with bolder ambitions.

countrywide and investing more than $200 

million in manufacturing and R&D centers in 

China. In 2006, the Chinese government reshaped 

the regulation of direct sales and Amway made 

The authors thank Richard Dobbs and Jeongmin Seong for their contributions to this article, which is adapted from a 

longer piece first published in the McKinsey Quarterly.

Yuval Atsmon, who was based in McKinsey’s Shanghai office from 2006 to 2012, is a principal in the London office, 
where Peter Child is a director; Udo Kopka is a director in the Hamburg and Shanghai offices. Copyright © 2013 
McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

