www.hbr.org

Is your company disciplined
enough to focus intensely on
what it does best?

The Coherence
Premium
by Paul Leinwand and Cesare Mainardi

With compliments of...

Part of the PwC Network

Reprint R1006F

This article is made available to you with compliments of PwC. Further posting, copying, or distribution is
copyright infringement.

hbr.org

Paul Leinwand (paul.
leinwand@booz.com) is a
partner at Booz & Company
in Chicago.

Cesare Mainardi (cesare.
mainardi@booz.com) is
managing director of Booz &
Company’s North American
business and is a member
of the firm’s executive
committee.

The Coherence
Premium

S
Illustration: Tomasz Walenta

Is your company disciplined enough to focus intensely on
what it does best? by Paul Leinwand and Cesare Mainardi
ustainable, superior returns accrue to companies that focus on what
they do best. The truth
is that simple, and yet it’s
incredibly hard to internalize. It is the rare company indeed that focuses
on “what we do better
than anyone” in making
every operating decision across every business unit
and product line. Rarer still is the company that has
aligned its differentiating internal capabilities with
the right external market position. We call such companies “coherent.”
Most companies don’t pass the coherence test
because they pay too much attention to external
positioning and not enough to internal capabilities. They succumb to intense pressure for top-line
growth and chase business in markets where they
don’t have the capabilities to sustain success. Their
growth emanates not from the core but from the

acquisition of apparent “adjacencies” that are often
anything but and the exploration of “blue oceans”
that turn out to be unswimmable. Even in contraction mode, when companies hunker down and try
to wring more out of execution, most strategies
fail to pay sufficient attention to capabilities. Costcutting, for example, is usually an across-the-board
exercise, rather than a considered reallocation of
resources. In fact, few strategies explicitly mention
capabilities at all. Instead, strategy development
follows the well-worn path from the market back to
the boardroom.
We’re not suggesting that companies disregard
market signals; all strategy is set within that vital
context. We are suggesting, however, that companies start from the opposite direction, figuring out
what they’re really good at and then developing
those capabilities (three to six at most) until they’re
best-in-class and interlocking. From there, strategy
becomes a matter of aligning that distinctive capabilities system with the right marketplace opportunities—and the market rewards them with outsize
June 2010 Harvard Business Review 1

This article is made available to you with compliments of PwC. Further posting, copying, or distribution is
copyright infringement.

m

The Coherence Premiu

The Power
of Coherence
A coherent company
focuses on what it does
best in making every
decision across every
returns. We call this the “coherence premium,” and
business. It derives its
we’ve measured it.
Let’s look at Wal-Mart to see how a capabilities- “right to win” by aligning:

driven strategy works. Most attribute the chain’s success to its impressive logistics operations or its ability
to get vendors to fall in line. But having one or two
superior capabilities is not enough. What really underlies Wal-Mart’s competitive advantage is a system
of mutually reinforcing capabilities that lowers total
value chain cost in a differentiated way. The giant
discount retailer achieves maximum efficiency by
integrating four capabilities: aggressive vendor management, expert point-of-sale data analytics, superior logistics, and rigorous working-capital management. Every one of these capabilities reinforces the
others and supports the company’s strategic purpose
to deliver “everyday low prices” to consumers. It’s a
capabilities system rooted in superior information.
Because of its world-class point-of-sale analytics,
Wal-Mart can continually tailor its product assortment to local consumption trends and feed vendors
better information than they have themselves. That,
in turn, increases the company’s leverage with suppliers and allows it to move inventory and manage
working capital with extraordinary efficiency. Every
product and service it sells fits with its “way to play,”
or market approach, and capabilities system. WalMart does not sell big-ticket items like furniture or
large appliances, for which its capabilities would not
create a cost advantage. And you won’t find a WalMart on Fifth Avenue or the Champs-Elysées.
It’s textbook capabilities coherence.

The Power of Coherence

A capability is something you do well that customers
value and competitors can’t beat. It’s more than an
activity or a function: It’s the interconnection of people, knowledge, IT, tools, and processes that enable
a company to outexecute rivals on some important
measure. It might be the ability to secure shelf space
in particular types of stores, or to use customer-data
mining to develop new products, or to bundle products and services to meet customers’ shifting needs
over time.
We are hardly the first to write about the importance of capabilities to strategy. C.K. Prahalad and
Gary Hamel’s seminal article, “The Core Competence of the Corporation” (HBR May 1990), was the
first in a long line of articles and books to explore
this idea. But a capability in isolation is not enough
to produce the coherence premium. We believe that

way to play

Executives, managers, and
employees at every level
understand the way the
company creates value for
customers

right
to win

capabilities
system

The engine of value
creation is the
system of three to
six capabilities that
allow companies to
deliver their value
proposition

product &
service Fit

All products and
services leverage
the same capabilities
system

a capabilities system creates value in a differentiated way.
A company becomes coherent only when its capabilities system is consciously chosen and implemented to support a focused strategic purpose, or
way to play, and is aligned with the right product
and service portfolio. It can provide clear answers to
these questions:
How are we going to face the market? Successful companies have a clear understanding of
how they create value for customers. Ways to play
are broad enough to allow flexibility and growth and
narrow enough to focus strategy and decision making. They include being the innovator, the low-cost
provider, the value chain optimizer, the customer
service king, and so forth.
What capabilities do we need? The engine
of value creation is a system of three to six capabilities that together allow a company to deliver its
value proposition effectively. When firms cultivate
a system of mutually reinforcing capabilities, their
competitive advantage becomes that much more
powerful.

What are we going to sell, and to whom?

Coherent companies build their product and service
portfolios so that every offering is aligned with the
capabilities system and the way to play. Products
that require different capabilities are surgically removed from the mix. The external market is continually scanned for new opportunities that leverage the
capabilities system.
Coherent companies build deep, scalable expertise in just a few areas and align their strategy and dayto-day decision making to take advantage of them.

Pfizer: A Case Study

The consumer health care business of Pfizer is a good
example of capabilities coherence. After its backto-back acquisitions of Warner-Lambert and Pharmacia in the early 2000s, the pharmaceutical giant
owned several leading consumer products: Listerine,
Benadryl, Sudafed, Nicorette, and Rogaine. In 2002,
Pfizer set the goal of becoming the leader in global
consumer health care and applied a capabilities lens
to the business.
Choosing the way to play. First Pfizer’s leaders examined the market dynamics to determine
how the company would compete. The market was
highly fragmented (no player enjoyed more than a
5% share globally) and plagued by low overall growth.
The so-called Rx-OTC switch—whereby prescription

2 Harvard Business Review June 2010
This article is made available to you with compliments of PwC. Further posting, copying, or distribution is
copyright infringement.

hbr.org

Idea in Brief
The pressure to grow the
top line is so intense that
most companies pay too
much attention to expansion
and not enough to building
differentiated capabilities.

A few companies start from
the opposite direction: They
figure out what they’re really
good at, then develop those
capabilities (three to six at
most) until they’re best-inclass and interlocking.

For them, strategy becomes
a matter of aligning what
they do well with the right
marketplace opportunities—
and the market rewards
them with sustained superior
returns.

The engine of value creation is a system of three to
six capabilities that together allow a company to
compete in a differentiated way.
drugs become candidates for over-the-counter sale—
was one key avenue of growth, but it was severely
constrained by tight country-by-country regulation and mass retailers that had begun introducing
private-label alternatives to brand-name drugs. Still,
the market was expected to grow as a result of global
demographic factors—aging populations, rising
income levels, and faster-paced lifestyles—that increased consumers’ tendency to self-medicate.
The breakthrough in determining the way to play
was Pfizer’s realization that demonstrable health
benefits mattered more than category strength in
driving sales. If you could make a defensible marketing claim that your product was better—“Benadryl is
54% more effective than the leading prescription allergy medicine” or “Listerine reduces plaque significantly more than brushing or flossing alone”—you
had a license to thrive worldwide. In other words,
consumer health care was more of a health care business than a consumer products business, making it a
natural fit for Pfizer.
Evaluating the capabilities system. On
the basis of this insight, Pfizer chose a distinctive
approach: to focus on innovation that would lead
to defensible therapeutic claims and the ability to
scale up a few brands worldwide. To achieve success, Pfizer identified a core system of six interlocking capabilities:
• Science-based innovation around formulations
• Ability to influence regulatory management and
government policy
• New-product development through the Rx-OTC
switch as well as through licensing and acquisition

• Claims-based marketing featuring a demonstrable health benefit
• Channel management in both general trade
stores and pharmacies (particularly product positioning, pricing, and promotion)
• Focused portfolio management of aggressive and
moderate growth brands and geographies
Each of these capabilities was important to carrying out Pfizer’s strategy, but it was the way they
worked together that was competitively differentiating. If Pfizer was going to build an unbeatable franchise in claims-based marketing, it needed sciencebased innovation and robust Rx-OTC switching capabilities to ensure a supply of formulations about
which to make those claims. It needed the ability to
get the claims approved by regulators and translated
into terms consumers around the world could understand when they made their purchase decisions.
And it needed focused portfolio management of
those few brands that promised blockbuster results.
Assessing product fit. Having made considered choices about how Pfizer would compete and
with what capabilities, executives recognized that
some products no longer fit the strategy. Thanks
largely to the Warner-Lambert acquisition, the consumer health care portfolio had migrated away from
OTC drugs and into personal care (Schick razors and
shaving cream) and confectionary (Chiclets, Trident,
and Bubblicious gums)—categories that leveraged
distinctly different capability sets. Personal care requires specific innovation in skin technologies, keeping up with fashion trends, and the ability to design
attractive packaging. Confectionary requires rapidJune 2010 Harvard Business Review 3

This article is made available to you with compliments of PwC. Further posting, copying, or distribution is
copyright infringement.

The Coherence Premium

The Coherence Test
How do you capture the coherence
premium? The first step is to determine
just how incoherent you are. You may
be sitting in a company that holds a
range of market positions and maintains disparate capabilities systems,
wondering where to begin. This simple
diagnostic will help you determine the
areas where coherence is embedded in
your organization—and where you may
be going off the rails.

Can We Do We
State It? Live It?
Way to Play

Are we clear about
how we choose to
create value in the
marketplace?

Are we investing in
the capabilities that
really matter to our
way to play?

m

Capabilities Syste

cycle flavor innovation and the ability to command
space at the front of the store near the cash register.
If Pfizer no longer was going to invest in those capabilities, it needed to divest those products, or risk
strategic incoherence.
In 2003, Pfizer sold the confectionary products
business to Cadbury Schweppes and the Schick–
Wilkinson Sword wet-shave business to Energizer
Holdings. These divestitures enabled Pfizer to focus even more attention and resources on growing
its global health care brands (Listerine, Zyrtec, and
Nicorette) at above-market rates and acquiring
new brands that could be differentiated based on
claims, such as Purell (“Purell kills 99.99% of diseasecausing germs within seconds”).
By 2006, Pfizer Consumer Healthcare had
grown its business to nearly $4 billion in annual
sales and was a premier company in its category,
delivering a rate of growth double the industry average. That year Pfizer redeemed the value built by
PCH by selling the business to Johnson & Johnson
for an unprecedented $16.6 billion, or 20.6 times
EBITDA (compared with average multiples of 15 at
the time).

Can we articulate the
three to six capabilities that describe
what we do uniquely
better than anyone
else?
Have we defined
how they work together in a system?

Do all our businesses
draw on this superior
capabilities system?
Do our organizational structure and
operating model support and exploit it?
Does our performance management
system reinforce it?

t

Product & Service Fi
Have we specified our
product and service
“sweet spot”?
Do we understand
how to leverage the
capabilities system
in new or unexpected
areas?

Do most of the products and services we
sell fit with our capabilities system?
Are new products
and acquisitions
evaluated on the
basis of their fit with
the way to play and
capabilities system?

The Payoff

So, do coherent companies have superior financial
performance? We examined a number of industries
and mapped the level of capabilities coherence of
the major players against their operating margins
over the past five years. (See the exhibit “Coherence
and Profitability in the Consumer Packaged Goods
Industry”). The data show that coherence in capabilities correlates strongly with greater profitability
(as measured by EBIT margin, or earnings before
interest and taxes divided by net revenue, over a
five-year period). This is particularly true in mature,
post-consolidation markets.
The winners. In the consumer packaged goods
industry, Coca-Cola—the most profitable company—
stands out because of its focus on beverage creation,
brand proposition, and global consumer insight.
This very simple but powerful capabilities system
enables it to exert tremendous strength in beverage
segments around the world. With the exception of
certain ill-fated forays (Columbia Pictures, for instance), Coke has been ruthless in its focus on beverages that benefit from this capabilities system. Its
ability to tap into consumer preferences allows it
to create an unrivaled emotional brand connection
with customers everywhere.

4 Harvard Business Review June 2010
This article is made available to you with compliments of PwC. Further posting, copying, or distribution is
copyright infringement.

hbr.org

Wrigley, now part of Mars, is also highly profitable
relative to the industry. It, too, hews to what it does
best—constant flavor innovation and securing shelf
space at the checkout counter. In fact, Mars’s acquisition of Wrigley is an example of how, when managed
well, capabilities not only drive value for a portfolio
but also define its composition. Mars’s decision to
leave Wrigley intact as a business indicates that this
acquisition was not motivated by scale alone—in
fact, Mars has transferred its nonchocolate brands,
Starburst and Skittles, to Wrigley’s portfolio to further consolidate and leverage these differentiating
capabilities. Mars knows chocolate. Wrigley knows
gums and candy.
The losers. ConAgra Foods, at the other end of
the spectrum, created incoherence through an unfocused acquisition binge in the 1990s. In the mid2000s, its portfolio spanned three segments that
drew on distinctly different capability sets: Prepared
foods, which required superior merchandising and
supply chain capabilities; snacks, which relied on
strong product innovation; and staples such as flour
and processed meat, which depended on efficient
sourcing and production. Not surprisingly, ConAgra
struggled with subpar performance in the years we
studied: 2002 to 2007. It has since shed some noncore brands in a move toward coherence and has
been rewarded with more robust financial performance in the past year.
Sara Lee’s operations were similarly unfocused.
Its diverse product portfolio as recently as five years
ago encompassed products ranging from bakery
goods to Hanes underwear to Kiwi shoe polish. As
the exhibit shows, its financial performance was at
the bottom of the pack. Sara Lee has undertaken
three major restructurings in the past 10 years and
has begun to tap into the coherence premium, having divested many noncore brands.
The coherence we’ve measured creates value in
four ways. First, it strengthens a company’s competitive advantage. Companies that focus on their
capabilities, day in and day out, continually improve
them. Employees become more skilled and systems
grow more adept, enabling companies to consistently outexecute their rivals and capture the topline growth in their industries.
Second, coherence focuses strategic investment
on what matters. Companies make better organic
growth decisions and pursue acquisitions that are in
keeping with their capabilities. It also reduces waste.
Coherent companies direct capital, time, and talent

to those activities, products, and businesses that
will extend their lead. They don’t invest in making
accounts payable world-class. They don’t fund R&D
projects that won’t enhance their position. And they
don’t overspend on marketing campaigns that won’t
move the needle on sales.
Third, coherence produces efficiencies of scale.
Companies can spend more wisely and grow more
easily when they deploy the same capabilities across
a larger array of products and services—in fact, these
companies can apply the capabilities to businesses
that would not normally be able to afford them.

Coherence and Profitability
in the Consumer Packaged Goods Industry
Companies that align a way to play, an integrated capabilities system, and
the right products and services create superior value, and we’ve measured
this “coherence premium” in a range of industries.
EBIT Margin
2003–2007

32%

28%

Coca-Cola

24%

Campbell’s

20%

Clorox

P&G

General Mills
16%

Wrigley’s
PepsiCo

Heinz

Kraft

Kimberly-Clark

Unilever
12%
Nestlé

ConAgra
8%

4%

Sara Lee
Capabilities
Coherence Score
0

20

40

60

80

100

NOTE SIZE OF BUBBLE REPRESENTS REVENUE

Our approach to scoring coherence is similar across industries and can
be distilled into three essential steps. First, we define the segments each
company serves. Next, we identify the capabilities that drive value for the
company in each segment. Finally, we determine the number of common
capabilities across all the segments the company serves. This score is
mapped against EBIT margin to determine the coherence premium.
June 2010 Harvard Business Review 5

This article is made available to you with compliments of PwC. Further posting, copying, or distribution is
copyright infringement.

The Coherence Premiu

Case Study
When Expansion Is the Enemy of Coherence
When companies focus on growth to the
exclusion of everything else, they unavoidably
end up competing in territory where they don’t
have the capabilities to win.
Consider this cautionary tale
of a company lured by the siren song of adjacency. Back in
1979, executives at AnheuserBusch reasoned that beer and
salty snacks go together—
they’re purchased and con­
sumed at the same time, they
both use yeast, and they both
rely on strong marketing and
distribution. The company
launched Eagle Snacks that
year. Then, in the late 1980s,
executives decided to expand
beyond pretzels and peanuts

in planes and bars and started
selling chips as well to grocery
and convenience stores. Snack
foods were an attractive adjacent market valued at $11 billion, and Anheuser-Busch was
rolling in cash.
But although the catego­
ries of beer and snack foods
appeared to draw on similar capabilities, there were
important differences that
Anheuser did not anticipate.
In particular, the categories
required very different distri-

bution capabilities. Alcohol is
heavily regulated; snack foods
are not. Snacks and beer are
stocked in different parts of
the store, they enter the store
through different doors, and
they’re ordered by different
buyers. Anheuser was not
used to buying shelf or display
space for beer, but it had to
for snacks. Further increasing
complexity, snacks and beer
have fundamentally different
weight and volume characteristics. For these reasons, snack
distribution proved far more
complicated and costly than
executives had imagined.
Making matters worse, the
beer maker had picked the

Finally, coherence creates alignment between
strategic intent and day-to-day decision making. In
a messy, confusing world, coherent companies execute better and faster because everyone in the organization understands what’s important.

The Journey to Coherence

Given the natural tendency of organizations to
devolve into incoherence, it takes extraordinary
leadership to pursue a capabilities-driven strategy.
Focusing on one way to compete and a system of
differentiating, mutually reinforcing capabilities often requires hard choices, including divesting businesses, streamlining nonessential functions, and
paring product and service lines. It means resisting
the temptation to leap into a hot new market where
your capabilities system can’t help you or to pursue
(especially in boom times) easy profits at the expense
of strategic focus.
We’ve seen such leadership in many company situations. After P&G stumbled badly in the late 1990s,
for example, the board gave A.G. Lafley license to
transform the sprawling consumer goods giant. He
accomplished that largely by recasting the company’s way to play around open innovation and by divesting assets that did not draw on P&G’s distinctive
capabilities system.

wrong market to play in as
an amateur. It was going up
against the formidable FritoLay, the King Kong of snack
foods. When Eagle Snacks
started making incursions
into Frito-Lay’s stronghold
in stores, the hammer came
down. Frito-Lay mobilized its
world-class capabilities system in flavor innovation, retail
coverage, and IT-enhanced
merchandising, launching an
array of new products and
slashing prices.
Eagle Snacks could not
compete. Its share of market
never topped 6%, whereas
Frito-Lay’s increased from
40% to 50%.

When the bottom dropped out of the tobacco
business in the wake of the U.S. government’s 1998
Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, R.J. Reynolds’s leadership team responded by applying a capabilities-driven focus to the company’s retail merchandising, removing $1 billion from its operating costs.
Most frequently, companies establish pockets
of coherence, as Pfizer did. A division can often be
sheltered from external pressures and scrutiny; a divisional leader may find it easier to stay focused on a
single way to compete.
Coherence around capabilities not only shapes
the leadership agenda; it enables leadership. It aligns
the organization at every level and gives employees
the tools to make the right decisions every day. The
clean and uncluttered ideal we describe—the company with an aligned strategy, capabilities system,
and product and service portfolio—may seem like an
impossibly remote destination. But there is value in
the journey. Every transaction, every R&D decision,
every management choice is an opportunity to take
a step forward rather than a step back.
HBR Reprint R1006

6 Harvard Business Review June 2010
This article is made available to you with compliments of PwC. Further posting, copying, or distribution is
copyright infringement.

F

hbr.org

