Marketing Trends 2023:
The India story
Resilient seeds for growth
India perspective
March 2023

Brochure / report title goes here |
 Section title goes here

02

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Table of contents
Executive summary

04

Brands answer economic instability 		
with marketing investments

06

Emerging technologies for marketers
to watch out for

08

Creativity as a force for growth

10

Stepping up to the sustainability agenda

12

About the project

14

Connect with us

15

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Executive summary
We know that marketing has undergone a
revival in the last decade, but despite the
significant transformations that have already
taken place, there is much more in the offing
to look out for. Last year saw a plethora of
innovative ideas such as vernacular content,
OTT commercials, rising personalisation,
metaverse-first launches, live streaming,
and sustainable initiatives. We have seen
how digital has developed into a crucial and
customer-preferred channel for customer
engagement, conversion, and acquisition.
To make more sense of this rapidly changing,
increasingly digital world, we at Deloitte
surveyed 1,015 global executives including
500 US executives including CMOs, CROs,
CDOs, CCOs etc. to better understand
how top brands are meeting the needs of
today’s customers.
In this Marketing Trends Report, Deloitte
explores the Indian perspective on key
trends identified at a global level - pertaining
to evolving marketing investments, rising
marketing technologies, sustainability
& creativity – that can be a catalyst and
multiplier for client success in 2023.
Businesses that are future-facing, are sharpfocussed on advanced technologies, market
expansion, and personalisation across
channels to ensure the sustained success of
their brands amidst unpredictable times.
Without giving in to fads and buzzwords,
adopting and Indianising emerging
technologies, such as the metaverse,
promises to unlock new frontiers in
immersive tech and branding opportunities.
04

India, with its strong technology industry
and entrepreneurial spirit, is well-poised to
help build a ”responsible metaverse” – for
accessibility, brand experiences, gaming,
virtual education, and meetings. Instead of
an ROI-focussed outlook, businesses should
adopt a long-term perspective when making
investments in the metaverse, as part of their
larger digital transformation goals.
Another thing common in future-facing
businesses that believe in offering a superior
human-first experience will continue to
be creativity across channels, even within
their own organisation. Indian CMOs are
well-placed to emphasise the importance of
creativity in a business, be it during market
expansion or creatively navigating the
economic downturn or even pushing the
envelope on how organisations engage with
customers across channels.
As businesses continue to script an exciting
future, their sustainability agendas are
evolving and CMOs are looking to drive
growth via tangible sustainability efforts. An
increasing number of Indian consumers are
finding sustainability to be a critical parameter
for brand choice, making marketers recognise
the significance of equity and environmental
impact, bolstered by India’s step into the
“Decade of Action” as part of its commitment
to the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals framework.
Despite the unprecedented challenges CMOs
have had to face in the past two years, we
believe that they are well-equipped to create
new levers of growth.

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

05

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Brands answer economic
instability with marketing
investments
Marketing has gone through a renaissance over the
past 10 years. Marketing today has delivered on driving
accountable growth. This is partly due to capabilities
such as dynamic, one-to-one personalisation, where
customers receive the right message at the right time and
place; or through marketing organisations, where teams
spend more time on strategic delivery versus tactics. The
introduction of technology and data has changed the
marketing space, giving it a seat in the boardroom.

06

The past two years of the global pandemic have only
deepened the marketing function’s impact. There has
been growth, innovation, and agility in the way marketing
reacted to navigate and thrive through such times.
However, globally, we are now transitioning towards a
period of economic uncertainty that will test this resolve
once again. We are witnessing consumer sentiments on
new purchases at an all-time low in economies such as the
US and the UK, owing to fears of recession, tech layoffs,
and geopolitical tensions.

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

On the other hand, India is set to become the third-largest
economy by 2027 and will have the third-largest stock market
by 20301. The opportunity has been set for India. We might see
minor hiccups this year as a ripple effect from global economies,

but a large chunk of this decade looks positive. This has been
demonstrated by strong consumer sentiments through
Deloitte’s periodic “State of the Consumer” survey.

Highlighted below are some snippets:

26 %

42 %

60 %

24 %

Indians said they feel their
financial situation worsened
over the past year vs.

Globally

Indians are planning to buy
a new vehicle in the next six
months vs. only

globally
(an all-time low for near-term
vehicle purchases).

56 %

41 %

Indians said they can afford
to spend on things that bring
them joy vs. only

Globally

Our recommendations to CMOs during this time would be to keep investing in their
marketing efforts, with some caution. India is a ripe market for growth, and companies
that invest early are likely to reap its benefits in the due course of time.

1

Morgan Stanley Research Bluepaper

07

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Emerging technologies for
marketers to watch out for
Which new technologies pique the most interest amongst
marketing leaders this year—and which of these are likely
to sustain over the long term?
\ (me-tә-vәrs) \ noun: The concept of a highly immersive
virtual world where people gather to socialise, play,
and work.
Our survey of 1,015 marketing executives indicates that
all industries across geographies are gravitating towards
the metaverse, indicating a compelling and competitive
advantage for the future.

2

Today, an increasing number of Indians are growing aware
of the metaverse. In an IPSOS survey, awareness of the
term “metaverse” exceeded the global average in India
(80 percent respondents) as compared with a 29-country
average of 52 percent. Additionally, more than 70 percent
adults are of the view that over the next 10 years2, the
development of metaverse applications such as virtual
learning, entertainment, gaming, socialisation, and
tourism, will change the way people lead their lives. With
the evolution of the metaverse, new business models, new
content, and novel ideas for interaction will emerge for
gamers and non-gamers alike.

"How the world sees the metaverse and extended reality" Report, 2022

https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2022-05/Global%20Advisor%20-%20WEF%20-%20Metaverse%20-%20May%202022%20-%20Graphic%20Report.pdf

08

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Metaverse investments today lay the foundations for the
future, generating additional economic growth over the next
two decades. Using early estimates on the potential metaverse
investments from existing literature, we estimate that the
impact of the metaverse on GDP in India could be between
US$79 and US$148 billion per year by 2035, roughly
1.3–2.4 percent of the overall GDP per year by 20353. How much
of these economic benefits are realised, and how quickly, will

depend on the technological developments as well as the unique
strategies India adopts.
The metaverse is a confluence of separate technologies–user
devices, the Internet of Things, computing and communication
networks, blockchain, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and 3D real-time
rendering, that are rapidly evolving at a different pace.

Some recent development that will shape metaverse adoption in India include the following:
Current predictions indicate that there will be one billion Indian smartphone users by 20264.
India launched the world’s largest rural broadband connectivity programme, BharatNet, which aims to extend
fibre connectivity to every Indian village by 2025, ending the digital divide5.
Real-time digital payments in India make up 40 percent of all such transactions globally, which is the highest
in the world6.
The pilot project of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) as digital Rupee-Retail (e-R) was launched on 		
1 December 2022, amongst a closed user group (CUG) comprising participating customers and merchants7.
In January 2021, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) released a draft national
strategy on Blockchain, envisaging a “national-level blockchain framework”8.
By December 2022, 5G services were available in 50 Indian cities and towns9.

The impact of the metaverse is not uniform across sectors,
and will be felt first in sectors that are experimenting with
new use cases. In India, most marketing use cases in the
metaverse have focussed on virtual launches. For instance,
an IPL team unveiled their new team logo in the metaverse,
and more recently, two leading global automakers launched
their respective metaverse spaces at the Auto Expo 2023.

While the metaverse is inevitable, a responsible metaverse is
not. To realise its full potential, some important issues must
be addressed—climate, inclusion, privacy, safety, mental
health, civic discourse, and an economy's social fabric.
A more immersive, pervasive internet could potentially
exacerbate negative external factors. However, forward
thinking can turn risks into opportunities.

Our recommendations to Indian marketing executives would be to not rush to market with
their brand’s metaverse, but assess and define clear objectives of how their organisation
can create experiences in the metaverse. In particular, brands that wish to be leaders in the
virtual space should consider laying the groundwork and keep experimenting for joining the
sphere of unlimited reality.

3

"The Metaverse in Asia: Strategies for accelerating economic impact" Report

https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/sg/Documents/center-for-the-edge/sg-metaverse-in-asia-deloitte-center-for-the-edge-nov22.pdf
4

Deloitte Global TMT (Technology, Media and Entertainment, Telecom) report, 2022

https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/in/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/in-TMT-predictions-2022-noexp.pdf
5

https://www.wirecable.in/2022/02/six-lakh-villages-to-be-fiberised-by-2025-devusinh-chauhan/

6

https://www.business-standard.com/article/current-affairs/india-leads-the-world-in-real-time-digital-payments-says-pm-modi-122081500622_1.html

7

T Rabi Sankar, “Central Bank Digital Currency – Is This the Future of Money” (speech, at the webinar organised by the Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, New Delhi, Thursday, July 22, 2021),

RBI.
8

https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/National_BCT_Strategy.pdf

9

https://www.indiatoday.in/technology/news/story/5g-service-now-available-in-50-indian-cities-and-towns-full-list-of-cities-check-if-your-is-listed-2307071-2022-12-09

09

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Creativity as a
force for growth
A Deloitte survey of 1,015 executives indicates that
creativity contributes to high growth. High-growth
brands (defined as those with annual revenue growth of
10 percent or more) are more likely than their negativegrowth peers to have the mindset and processes to
allow creativity to flourish. Not only are higher-growth
brands more likely to view creative ideas as essential
to long-term success, but they are also more likely to
create an environment that supports creative thinking by
encouraging risk-taking and cross-functional collaboration.
In India, most companies have realised the importance of
creativity as a skill, and are increasingly looking for people

10

who are considered “creative” at their jobs. It is a soft skill
that has seen a 72 percent increase in demand in the last
two years (April 2020–April 2022) per research conducted
by a major job search site.
2022 also saw Indian agencies amass their best-ever haul
at Cannes Lions with 47 medals across 20 categories. India
has been at the forefront of creativity-led marketing that
goes beyond just ads—delivering great work using diverse
and emerging tech including virtual reality, augmented
reality, AI, and the metaverse.

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Examples include:

A leading FMCG brand
used AI and voice
cloning to create hyperpersonalised ads that
served both the brand
and thousands of local
businesses with its brand
ambassador—a leading
Indian film star.

Two leading FMCG
players created unique
experiences for India’s
first metaverse wedding.

Another example is the
use of generative AI to
recreate cricket legend,
Sachin Tendulkar. A
leading insurance player
created an 11-year-old
Sachin Tendulkar using AI
video regeneration tech.

On the marketing front, brands in India are beginning to use creators as strategic partners
for creativity and growth. Brands can maximise their relationship with creators through the
following:
1. Giving creators the freedom to express themselves with minimal interference, leading to
more authentic and appealing content
2. Building a partnership with creators that fosters two-way growth for both the brand and
the creator
3. Aligning expectations with creative thoughts and fluidity across the organisation

11

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Stepping up to the
sustainability agenda
Today, sustainability has become a core topic in the
boardrooms of businesses transcending industry lines,
and the general consensus is that sustainability and
profitability can co-exist.
Consumers are growing increasingly aware of the
environmental and social impact of their purchasing
decisions and are looking for companies that share their
values. To tackle this, organisations have begun employing
sustainable marketing strategies that consider the
environmental and social impact of a company's activities.

10

According to Deloitte’s CxO Sustainability report10,
80 percent Indian executives today see the world at a
tipping point for responding to climate change, compared
with 53 percent eight months ago. There is a prevailing
sense of optimism, as 94 percent currently (compared to
61 percent, eight months ago) agree that with immediate
action, we can limit the worst effects of climate change.
Compared to global CxOs, Indian CxOs are a touch more
likely to have been personally impacted by climate events
over the past year, with extreme heat, water shortages,

"Deloitte 2022 CxO Sustainability Report"

https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/in/Documents/strategy/in-strategy-2022-cxo-sustainabilty-survey-india-noexp.pdf

12

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

and severe flooding emerging as top impacts. They are also
more likely than global CxOs to have experienced more frequent
and powerful storms, as well as rising sea levels.
Compared with the global average, Indian executives are likely to
report higher stakeholder pressure to act from board members,
the government, and shareholders, as changing regulatory
environment and employee activism have increased their
organisations’ sustainability actions over the past year.
As India marches into the “Decade of Action” by showcasing its
commitment to the UN SDG framework, various Indian brands

are walking the talk by adopting sustainable practices.
For example, a global financing institution’s India strategy
includes financing and investment solutions to help accelerate
the transition to a low-carbon, sustainable economy. A
homegrown FMCG major is targeting to collect 35,000 mt of
post-consumer plastic waste and has already collected over
30,000 mt by November 2022. A leading oil and gas company is
proactively taking initiatives in low-carbon product technologies
such as 1G and 2G bioethanol, compressed biogas, biodiesel,
and EV charging corridor, and others.

The following are a few imperatives for brands to champion sustainability and translate it into action:
Make customers an emotional
anchor for sustainability:
Brands need to create a connection between customer satisfaction and sustainability. It is important for customers to
believe in the process of making responsible choices and see sustainability as an emotional motivator, rather than just a
responsibility.

Execution to back intent:
Brands must make a sincere, honest, and lasting commitment to sustainability instead of woke washing or
greenwashing, and this should be reflected in the execution and communicate of these initiatives. This is especially true
when faced with a generation of consumers who are passionate and unapologetic about what they believe in.

Utilise and amplify
marketing’s role:
Marketing can and should play a leading role in sustainability issues within organisations, especially leading the charge in
investing, keeping in mind the long-term societal needs and expectations for sustainability in the future.

Companies that make sustainability a central part of their decision-making process will
be better equipped to take advantage of new market opportunities, minimise risks, and
establish a long-term positive reputation.

13

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

About the CMO programme:
Enabling CMOs to reach their highest potential
The CMO Programme supports CMOs as they navigate the complexities
of the role, anticipate upcoming market trends, and respond to challenges
with agile marketing. It was developed to offer CMOs a trusted, valued, and
comprehensive resource for personal career development and success as
the CMO role evolves and expands.

Ashvin Vellody
Partner and Co-Leader,
CMO Programme
Deloitte India
ashvinv@deloitte.com

14

Chandrashekhar Mantha
Partner and Co-Leader,
CMO Programme
Deloitte India
cmantha@deloitte.com

Marketing Trends 2023: The India story |
 Resilient seeds for growth

Connect with us
Karishma Gupta
Partner
Deloitte India
gkarishma@deloitte.com

Balaji Venkatraman
Partner
Deloitte India
balajive@deloitte.com

IrvinderRay
Executive Director
Deloitte India
iray@deloitte.com

Contributors
Barsha Chakraborty
Madhur Bhatia
Saurabh Kamalakaran

15

Contract separation strategy in M&As | Staying a step ahead

Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, a UK
private company limited by guarantee (“DTTL”), its network of member firms,
and their related entities. DTTL and each of its member firms are legally
separate and independent entities. DTTL (also referred to as “Deloitte Global”)
does not provide services to clients. Please see www.deloitte.com/about for a
more detailed description of DTTL and its member firms.
This material is prepared by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP (DTTILLP).
This material (including any information contained in it) is intended to provide
general information on a particular subject(s) and is not an exhaustive
treatment of such subject(s) or a substitute to obtaining professional
services or advice. This material may contain information sourced from
publicly available information or other third party sources. DTTILLP does
not independently verify any such sources and is not responsible for any
loss whatsoever caused due to reliance placed on information sourced
from such sources. None of DTTILLP, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, its
member firms, or their related entities (collectively, the “Deloitte Network”)
is, by means of this material, rendering any kind of investment, legal or other
professional advice or services. You should seek specific advice of the relevant
professional(s) for these kind of services. This material or information is not
intended to be relied upon as the sole basis for any decision which may affect
you or your business. Before making any decision or taking any action that
might affect your personal finances or business, you should consult a qualified
professional adviser.
No entity in the Deloitte Network shall be responsible for any loss whatsoever
sustained by any person or entity by reason of access to, use of or reliance on,
this material. By using this material or any information contained in it, the user
accepts this entire notice and terms of use.
© 2023 Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP. Member of Deloitte Touche
Tohmatsu Limited
16

