RETAIL RESEARCH 

IPO Note 

21 September 2017 

Prataap Snacks Limited 

Issue Snapshot: 

Issue Open: Sept 22 – Sept 26, 2017 

Price  Band:  Rs.  930  –  938  (A  discount  of 
Rs 90 is offered to eligible employees) 

Issue  Size:  *51,37,966  Equity  Shares 
(including *Fresh issue of 21,32,196 
Equity Shares + Offer for sale 30,05,770 
equity shares) 

Offer Size: Rs.477.83 crs – 481.94 crs  

QIB                         Upto               50% eq sh    
Retail                     atleast            35%  eq sh  
Non Institutional   atleast          15%  eq sh 

Face Value: Rs 5 

Book value: Rs 114.6 (March 31, 2017) 

Bid  size:  -  15  equity  shares  and 
multiples thereof  

in 

100% Book built Issue 

Capital Structure:  
Pre Issue Equity:                  Rs. 10.66 cr 
Post issue Equity:                Rs. 11.73 cr 

Listing: BSE & NSE 

Global  Coordinators  and  Book  Running 
Financial 
Lead  Manager: 
Services 
Financial 
Institutional Securities Limited. 

Edelweiss 

Limited, 

JM 

Book  Running  Lead  Manager:  Spark 
Capital Advisors (India) Private Limited 

Registrar  to  issue:  Karvy  Computershare 
Pvt Ltd 

Shareholding Pattern 

Shareholding Pattern 

Pre 
issue % 

*Post 
issue % 

Promoter and 
Promoter Group  

Public  

Total 

92.67 

73.41 

7.33 

26.59 

100.0 

100.0 

Source for this Note: RHP 
* = Assuming issue subscribed at the higher band 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

Background & Operations: 
Prataap Snacks Ltd (PSL) is one of the top six Indian snack food companies in terms of revenues 
in  2016,  and  among  the  fastest  growing  companies  in  the  Indian  organised  snack  market 
between 2010 and 2016. It is present in three major savoury snack food categories in India and 
all its products are sold under the Yellow Diamond brand. In Fiscal 2012, the Company acquired 
the  snack  foods  business  of  its  Group  Company,  Prakash  Snacks  Private  Limited.  Pursuant  to 
such arrangement, it acquired the Yellow Diamond brand and the snack foods business under 
such brand. It has over the years leveraged its understanding of target markets and consumer 
segments, product innovation capabilities, extensive distribution network, strategically located 
manufacturing facilities, and has focused its marketing and promotional activities to strengthen 
its product brands and establish the Yellow Diamond brand across India. Its diversified product 
portfolio includes three categories 

Extruded  Snacks.  Extruded  snacks  are  processed,  reconstituted  and  shaped  potato  or  cereal 
based snacks. Extruded snacks may be flavoured or unflavoured. It includes puffed snacks. Its 
Extruded  Snacks  products  are  divided  into  two  sub-categories:  (i)  Shaped  Extruded  Snacks, 
which  includes  Puffs,  Rings  and  Pellets  products;  and  (ii)  Random  Extruded  Snacks,  which 
includes Chulbule product.  

Chips.  Chips  include  fried,  sliced  chips  or  crisps  made  from  potatoes,  hummus,  lentils  etc.  It 
includes flavoured and unflavoured chips, and may be standard chips, thick-cut and / or crinkle-
cut. Currently, it sells Potato Chips under the Yellow Diamond brand. 

Namkeen.  Namkeen  are  a  type  of  traditional  savoury  Indian  snack  which  includes  products 
such as moong dal, masala or fried nuts, sev and bhujia. Namkeen under the Yellow Diamond 
brand was launched by the Company in Fiscal 2012 

PSL  has  set  up  a  pan-India  distribution  network  supported  by  strategically 
located 
manufacturing  facilities.  Its  wide  network  of  super  stockists  and  distributors  is  supported  by 
large team of sales representatives and arrangements with various modern retail outlets. As of 
June 30, 2017, its distribution network included 218 super stockists across 26 States and one 
Union Territory in India and over 3,500 distributors. It owns and operates three manufacturing 
facilities,  one  located  at  Indore,  Madhya  Pradesh  and  the  other  two  located  at  Guwahati, 
Assam.  In  addition,  it  has  engaged  two  facilities  on  contract  manufacturing  basis,  located  at 
Bengaluru, Karnataka  and at Kolkata, West  Bengal. The Bengaluru facility was  engaged  on an 
informal, non-exclusive basis between October 1, 2011 and July 31, 2016. This facility has been 
engaged exclusively pursuant to the Bengaluru Contract Manufacturing Agreement with effect 
from  August  1,  2016.  These  facilities  has  access  to  cost  efficient  transportation  to  major 
markets and enable the company to benefit from transportation cost efficiencies from reverse 
logistics arrangements. 

Objects of Issue: 
The Offer consists of a Fresh Issue by PSL and an Offer for Sale. The Company will not receive 
any proceeds from the Offer for Sale. The Company proposes to utilize the Net Proceeds  from 
the Fresh Issue towards funding the following objects: 
  Repayment/pre-payment, in full or part, of certain borrowings availed by the Company  
  Funding  capital  expenditure  requirements  in  relation  to  expansion  (including  through 
setting  up  of  a  new  production  line  and  construction  of  a  building)  and  modernisation  at 
certain of its existing manufacturing facilities;  
Investment  in  Subsidiary,  Pure  N  Sure,  towards  enabling  the  repayment/pre-payment  of 
certain borrowings availed of by its Subsidiary;  

 

  Marketing and brand-building activities; and  
  General corporate purposes.  

P a g e  | 1 

     
 
                                                                                                                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

Requirement of Funds and proposed schedule of deployment (Rs.mn) 

Particulars 
Repayment/pre-payment, in full or part, of certain borrowings availed by the Company  
Funding capital expenditure requirements in relation to expansion (including through setting up of a new production line and 
construction of a building) and modernisation at certain of its existing manufacturing facilities 
Investment in Subsidiary, Pure N Sure, towards enabling the repayment/pre-payment of certain borrowings availed of by its 
Subsidiary 
Marketing and brand-building activities; and  
General corporate purposes 
Total 

Amount 
129.82 

669.98 

293.70 
400.00 
* 
* 

Competitive Strengths 
Innovation driven diversified product portfolio: PSL’s diversified product portfolio includes a wide range of snack foods, flavours and SKUs, 
thereby effectively addressing a large consumer base. Its ability to identify market trends and develop new flavours catering to the palate of 
Indian consumers are significant factors that has contributed to the growth of its business. As of July 31, 2017, it had 40 flavours of Chips and 
Extruded Snacks and 23 varieties of Namkeen in the market. Its capacity to develop innovative snacks products, effectively supported by its 
strategically located manufacturing and distribution network, enables it to launch and market new products aligned to evolving consumer 
preferences. This facilitates minimal time-to-scale, and has enabled PSL to generate revenues of Rs. 1 billion from each of its key products, 
i.e., Potato Chips, Chulbule, Rings, and Namkeen within a few years of launch. Due to diverse product portfolio, PSL has limited dependence 
on  a  single  raw  material.  It  uses  a  range  of  raw  materials  used  in  production  of  its  products  from  potato  for  Chips  to  corn  and  rice  for 
Extruded Snacks and gram, flour, peanuts and pulses for its Namkeen products. Owing to PSL’s wide range of raw materials, its business and 
results of operations are less susceptible to price fluctuation or disruptions in availability of major raw materials. 

Value  proposition  for  consumers:  PSL’s  brand  philosophy  emphasises  delivery  of  maximum  value  to  consumers  and  is  reflected  in  its 
marketing campaign “Dildaar Hain Hum”. Its brand equity has increased over the years, driven by product innovation and cost efficiencies in 
its production and distribution operations, and offering superior value proposition for consumers, through a wide range of consumer driven 
flavours, and providing relatively high grammage, i.e., a relatively high weight to volume ratio, for products. the relatively high grammage 
and consequent  value proposition that it offers to the price conscious middle-class Indian consumers who form a  large proportion of the 
consumer market in India for its snacks products, has been an important factor in the growth and acceptance of brand and its market share, 
particularly in the urban, semi-urban and rural markets in India. Certain of PSL’s promotional activities, such as including a wide range of toys 
in its Rings products, primarily targeted at children, also provide a value proposition for parents and families. It has over the years developed 
an effective procurement  system  for  such toys.  The  revenues generated by its  Rings product grew at a  CAGR of  105.98%  since launch to 
Fiscal 2017 and Rings generated revenues of Rs. 3,987.19 million in Fiscal 2017. These thematic toy campaigns has contributed effectively to 
its brand building efforts associated with a value proposition for consumers. 

Strategic supply chain for a pan-India distribution network: PSL is a pan-India snack food company. Its wide spread and integrated sales and 
distribution network enables it to reach a wide range of consumers and ensure effective market penetration. Points of sale for snack food 
products include traditional retail points, such as grocery stores, as well as modern retail outlets including supermarkets, hypermarkets and 
convenience stores for sales in urban areas. Its products are sold in urban, semi-urban and rural regions through wide distribution network. 
It distributes its products through super stockists who are appointed to operate and maintain outlets/warehouses for sale to distributors and 
dealers.  It  has  entered  into  formal  agreements  with  super  stockists  and  has  committed  commercial  relationships  with  most  of  its  super 
stockists for over approximately three years. PSL’s super stockists maintain dealer and distributor relationships and its sales team monitors 
the  entire  distribution  network.  It  has  over  the  years  effectively  managed  large  distribution  network  and  developed  strong  supply  and 
distribution chain relationships across the various regions in which it operates within India. The East Zone is generally considered to be  one 
of the most difficult markets for generation of increased market share. Its wide distribution network and product configuration has enabled 
it to achieve a CAGR of 45.82% in revenues from operations (net) from the East Zone in the period from Fiscal 2013 to Fiscal 2017. 

Strategically  located  manufacturing  facilities:  PSL  owns  and  operates  three  manufacturing  facilities  across  India.  One  of  these 
manufacturing facilities is located at Indore in Madhya Pradesh while the other two are located at Guwahati in Assam. It has  also engaged 
two facilities on a contract manufacturing basis, located at Bengaluru, Karnataka and at Kolkata, West Bengal. Its manufacturing facilities are 
strategically located, near its key markets and raw material supplies, thereby ensuring cost-efficiencies in procurement of raw material as 
well as transportation of finished products through super stockists and distributors, and enabling it to leverage economies of scale. Indore in 
Madhya Pradesh is a key distribution hub for quality potatoes, the key raw material for Potato Chips. Indore is also well connected to Delhi 
as well Mumbai, key distribution hubs for its products in the North Zone and West  Zone, respectively. Its location enables it  to transport 
products from Indore to Mumbai and Delhi at cost-effective rates, thereby ensuring lower transportation costs and resulting operating cost 
efficiencies. Similarly, Guwahati in Assam also  serves as a  strategic  location for leveraging such efficient  logistics operations and resulting 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

lower  transportation  costs.  The  Guwahati  and  Kolkata  facilities  enables  effective  distribution  across  the  East  Zone.  Its  contract 
manufacturing  facilities  also  enables  it  to  ensure  that  its  supply  is  able  to  effectively  meet  the  market  demand  for  its  products  without 
significant capital expenditure. In addition, its Guwahati – II manufacturing facility, which commenced production on April 8, 2016, is eligible 
for value added tax and sales tax exemption for 15 years from the date of commencement of commercial production. 

Successful track record and professional management:  PSL acquired certain  manufacturing businesses from its Group Company, Prakash 
Snacks pursuant to a business transfer agreement dated September 28, 2011. As part of the business transfer,  the Company also acquired 
the brand Yellow Diamond. It has since witnessed substantial growth and also been gaining market share in the snack food market over the 
years. From 2010 to 2016, its market share increased from 1% to 4% (Source: FS Report). It became the market leader in rings segment in 
2015. Although,  it began  its  operations only in Fiscal 2009,  it has established a  strong presence geographically across different  regions in 
India. PSL is one of the leading players in the East Zone with a strong presence in the North and West Zones and is increasing penetration in 
the South Zone as well. It has benefitted from the experience of its promoter and chief executive officer, Mr. Amit Kumat, who has been part 
of  the  snack  food  industry  for  over  21  years.  PSL  has  established  a  robust  internal  compliance  monitoring  system  and  reputed  internal 
auditors that helps ensure effective corporate governance. Its management team’s understanding of target markets and consumer demand 
and preferences has enabled it to grow business and expand its operations. 

Business Strategy: 
Deeper  penetration  in  existing  markets  and  explore  select  new  territories:  PSL’s  key  focus  is  to  increase  its  penetration  in  the  markets 
where it currently operates by replicating the same proposition that has helped it to grow its brand. It intends to deepen penetration in the 
North and West Zones, particularly in the states of Rajasthan, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. It has a strong presence in regional pockets and 
intends to proliferate its presence deeper into these to be able to serve all classes and customer segments. In the relatively newer South 
Zone  market,  PSL  intends  to  use  its  Rings  product  to  garner  market  share  as  it  did  in  the  East  Zone  to  gain  brand  loyalty.  It  intends  to 
leverage  on  the  familiarity  of  popular  products  to  increase  penetration  of  entire  product  portfolio  in  East  Zone.  To  increase  visibility  and 
build the Yellow Diamond brand in existing markets it intends to focus on sale of its products to such premium outlets. Hypermarkets and 
supermarkets usually stock larger size SKUs. While continuously reinforcing its position in India, PSL plans to explore select markets abroad, 
such as South Asia, to expand its sales in these regions and enhance brand recognition internationally. It intends to exploit macroeconomic 
factors and the trends in the snacks market, which are similar to those of the Indian snacks market. 

Expand  and  modernize  production  capabilities:  PSL  intends  to  expand  its  production  capabilities  to  aid  efforts  to  deepen  its  pan-India 
presence. So as to cater to the increased demand, it intends to use a part of the Net Proceeds towards expansion and modernization of its 
manufacturing facilities, specifically at Indore manufacturing facility. In order to cater to the increasing demand, it intends to add production 
lines for Chips and Namkeen along with a packaging line and purchase of related utilities at its Indore manufacturing facility. It also intends 
to modernise its existing facilities and intends to replace some of its existing Chulbule packaging machinery at Indore with newer and more 
advanced machinery and modernise its effluent treatment plant at Indore. PSL further intends to utilize this additional capacity by adding 
certain packaging machines to match the capacity of the  packaging and production lines.  To deepen  its penetration in the South Zone,  it 
intends to expand the packaging line and purchase related utilities for Chulbule at its contract manufacturing facility at Bengaluru 

Increased advertising and marketing activities: PSL has appointed Salman Khan, a popular Hindi movie actor, as its brand ambassador. It has 
also had many successful campaigns to promote its products. These include tie-ups with popular children’s television channels and programs 
to promote its products through select cartoons, programs and movie marketing. To further increase brand awareness and achieve brand 
recall,  especially  in  urban,  semi-urban  and  rural  markets,  it  intends  to  increase  its  marketing  and  advertising  activities,  by  increasing 
advertising activities on Hindi general entertainment channels, Hindi movie channels, Hindi music channels, news channels, sports channels, 
and further strengthening its campaigns on kids’ channels. PSL intends to leverage the Yellow Diamond brand, and advertise all products in 
savoury  snack  portfolio  under  the  Yellow  Diamond  brand.  It  intends  to  use  some  part  of  the  Net  Proceeds  for  advertising  and  marketing 
activities to increase brand awareness and recall of Yellow Diamond. It also intends to increase its targeted marketing approach for its Rings 
product with monthly visibility campaigns on popular Hindi, English and vernacular kids’ channels. In digital marketing, the company intends 
to selectively create presence across social media platforms and directed marketing through search engines. 

Expand  product  portfolio  into  healthier  snacks  segment  and  confectionaries:  PSL  will  continue  to  expand  its  product  portfolio  and 
distribution  reach,  focus  on  increasing  sales  volumes,  and  strives  to  provide  differentiated  offerings  to  its  consumers.  It  will  leverage  its 
extensive experience to solidify its industry position, by creating new products, entering new product categories and building new brands to 
capitalize on emerging trends. It intends to increase its research and development efforts on the product attributes that are most valued by 
its  consumers,  including  taste,  nutrition,  food-safety  and  convenience.  This  would  allow  the  company  to  better  serve  increasing  demand 
from consumers for healthier, tastier and higher quality food products and would enable it to further gain market share in the savoury snack 
segment.  PSL  also  intend  to  foray  into  the  chocolate-based  confectionary  snack  business.  The  market  for  confectionaries  is  estimated  to 
grow at about 15-18% over the next four to five years driven primarily by chocolate confectionaries. It perceive this to be a higher margin 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

segment  where  there  is  significant  demand  and  growth  potential  which  is  relatively  untapped.  It  intends  to  use  its  currently  established 
distribution network to cover the new products it plans to introduce. 

Industry: 
Indian Economy and Food Industry 
India is one of the few countries that continues to see brisk growth in spite of the ongoing economic slow-down at a global level. A 7.6% 
growth  in  Fiscal  2017  has  been  forecast  by  the  RBI.  It  is  expected  that  with  the  revival  of  industrial  activity,  introduction  of  policies 
favourable  to  industries,  “Make  in  India”  promotions,  and  low  energy  costs  the  actual  growth  may  be  higher  than  predicted.  The  large 
population and the increasing number of youth in the country are fuelling the demand for various products, which is  infusing liquidity in the 
market. With a large population, the food market in India is seeing large investments. The current Indian foods market is estimated at Rs. 
2,700 billion and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 11%. The food industry has received FDI of about USD 6.7 billion in the last 15 years with a 
further potential to receive over USD 33 billion in the next ten years. Additionally, the food processing industry in India contributes about 
14% to the GDP, while accounting for 6% of all industrial investments. The per capita food consumption in India is three to four times lesser 
than  that  of  developed  economies.  The  low  per  capita  consumption  and  the  shortage  of  food  in  certain  pockets  offer  tremendous 
opportunities for food companies. This has been recognised by many companies, including the global ones, which are increasingly investing 
in India. 

India is the second most populous country in the world and the population is expected to grow at the rate of 1.1% over the next five years. 
The share of young people in the total population was 64% in 2015, which is of key importance as they will be the demand drivers for various 
products, including foods in general, and packed foods. This share is expected to continue and highlights a large potential for growth in India. 
Unlike its predecessors, the current  generation spends money more easily, especially on food, apparel, and traveling, as a  result of more 
disposable income. With higher employment opportunities in cities, young people prefer to migrate to urban areas; with limited time and 
resources to cook, the young working population depends on processed foods. This is clearly reflected by the increasing sales of processed 
food products in Tier-1 and Tier-2 cities. Processed foods offer convenience, are quick to consume and offer variety while being wholesome 
at the same time. It is estimated that by 2020, 35% of India’s population will be living in urban areas against the current 32%. 

The middle and upper middle class in India have been playing an important role in the growth of the country. Increasing from 44% of the 
total population in 2010 to 62% by 2020, they are expected to be the major growth engines by fuelling demand across all sectors including 
food, consumer products, realty, etc. The economic liberalization of the early 1990s kick started growth in the Indian market; attracted by 
this growth, large talent pool and cheaper labour costs, global companies entered India. This opened up multiple avenues for  employment, 
in the process creating a more robust middle class. It is this middle class that is the target of majority of the companies, because of the sheer 
number of people contained  in this bracket. With incomes to spend, being upwardly mobile, and influenced by global  trends, the middle 
class is consuming more food, especially packaged foods, while experimenting with tastes, cuisines, flavours, and products. Companies have 
based their strategy on these behavioural traits of the middle class. With the predicted GDP growth and urbanization trends, the proportion 
of middle class people is expected to increase to 62% of the population by 2020. This underlines the potential for companies. 

Overview of the Packaged Food Market in India 
Packaged  foods  include  ready-to-eat  /  cook  foods  that  are  packed  and  sold  to  consumers.  They  are  primarily  aimed  at  convenience  and 
usually undergo a certain degree of processing to increase shelf life, taste, stability, etc. It includes food items like bakery products, canned / 
dried processed food, frozen processed food, meal replacement products, dairy products, snacks, confectionaries, beverages, etc. 

India Organised Packaged Food Market: Split by Product Type, 2016 

Demand Drivers 
Lifestyle changes, increasing affordability, urbanisation, and fast-paced lifestyle are some of the key factors that have boosted demand for 
packaged foods. Over the last four to five years, the market for organised packaged foods has grown at about 20-25%.  Increasing product 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

and packaging innovation, emphasis on healthy foods and increasing demand for convenience foods will continue to drive the demand for 
packaged foods at over 30% over the next few years as well. 

Indian Packaged Snack and Savouries Market 
The  Rs.  550  billion  Indian  snacks  market  is  characterised  by  a  large  number  of  unorganised  players  across  all  product  segments.  This  is 
because traditionally snacks can and are very specific to each region, and hence, many small companies cater to that market.  These players 
have a slim portfolio of products, usually of a single category and in many cases only provide traditional snack items. They also operate in a 
small geographic range confined to a single state or city. Apart from this, there is a large presence of players that supply  fresh products in 
chips  and  traditional  Indian  snacks  categories.  Over  time,  large  FMCG  companies  understood  the  potential  of  the  snacks  market,  and 
entered it in a big way, using their existing supply chains to their advantage. These companies are typically characterised by a large product 
portfolio across multiple product categories, aggressive advertisements and promotions, active R&D, etc. In spite of these players being the 
leaders  in  several  product  categories,  majority  of  the  market  continues  to  be  catered  by  the  unorganised  segment.  With  increasing 
competition and cost pressure, there is a gradual shift towards increase in organised players across all product segments. It is estimated that 
market share between organised and unorganised players will almost be equal in the next five to seven years. 

In India, the demand for organized snack foods grew at a CAGR of 14% from 2012 to 2016. The organised snacks market has been witnessing 
huge growth over the last few years. This is because of the overall growth in the processed foods segment, followed by the moving trend 
towards consolidation of markets. Some of the traditional Indian snacks have fared better than western snacks. With better infrastructure 
and technology to create better tastes, organised players have been able to re-create traditional Indian snacks and products that are helping 
them  increase  their  market  share.  The  role  of  the  internet  and  media  has  also  been  a  factor  in  pushing  this  trend.  This  growth  trend  is 
expected to continue with the organised sector consolidating more market share over the next five years. 

The market for organised Indian snacks has grown by 11% between 2015 and 2016. Availability of a variety of snacks, easy accessibility and a 
variety of SKUs are some of the major factors that have influenced this growth in the market. PepsiCo India, with Lays’ Chips and Kurkure in 
its portfolio, is the market leader with about 30% market share. There are multiple medium-sized companies, as well, such as Balaji Wafers 
and Prataap Snacks, which are gaining popularity across India. A variety of branded and unbranded snack products are also available in the 
market, usually restricted to a city or even a locality within a city. Bulk of the sales of snacks is through independent grocery stores as they 
are more accessible, though options are limited as almost 95% of the products they stock are the most popular products. across all product 
segments with East and South showing moderate consumption. No major change is expected in this trend, though an increase in the South 
Indian market can be expected as many companies are looking to increase their penetration in that market. 

Sales Channels 
Independent Small Grocers: These are stores of the traditional format, and are the “mom and pop” stores that sell a wide range of products, 
predominantly grocery products. They are wide spread across the country and are not usually a brand that is recognised beyond the city or 
area in which they are located. They are owned by entrepreneurs owning and operating one or two retail outlets. These are typically family 
concerns. Convenience Stores: These are usually present around petrol pumps and are open late in the night. A mixture of grocery and other 
essential FMCG items are stocked at such stores. 

Other Retailers: These are retail outlets that sell predominantly food, beverages and tobacco or a combination of these. This also includes 
health  food  stores,  kiosks  and  markets  selling  groceries  predominantly.  Supermarkets/  Hypermarkets:  Hypermarkets  are  chains  or 
independent retail outlets with a selling space of over 2,500 square meters and with a primary focus on selling food/beverages/tobacco and 
other groceries. They also stock non-grocery merchandise and essential home care products. Supermarkets are typically smaller versions of 
hypermarkets. 

Due to the structure of the Indian retail market, there is a large presence of unorganised small grocery stores and petty shops that cater to 
the day-to-day demands of consumers. These shops are present in residential areas and stock essential products such as food, personal care 
etc. Hence, companies target these shops to ensure maximum consumer reach. Sales of snacks in these independent grocery stores account 
for about 75% of the total snacks sales. These shops typically stock the most popular products of each category of the most popular SKU size. 
Petty shops usually stock the smallest SKU size product, and this is popular usually in the rural markets. 

There is an increasing trend towards modern retail trade in the urban markets. Many retail chains, including international ones, have shown 
interest  in  the  Indian  organised  retail  segment.  Consumers  are  attracted  by  the  factors  such  as  size  of  the  outlets,  multiple  options  and 
varieties,  presence  of  imported  products,  offers  and  discounts  and  the  option  to  purchase  all  products  under  one  roof.  Hence,  snack 
companies  are  also  increasingly  offloading  their  products  through  hypermarkets  and  supermarkets.  This  allows  them  to  display  larger 
varieties,  more SKU options,  launch new products and  flavours, and sell  multi-packs through offers,  etc. Since  many consumers prefer to 
shop for the entire month’s needs from supermarkets, snack companies stock medium-sized and large sized packets to cater to this segment 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

of consumers. Trends indicate that going forward the role of modern retail will increase. However, the domination of small grocery stores is 
expected to continue for the next five to ten years. E-tailing of snacks is still in a nascent stage and snack companies may not look at this in a 
big way since snacks are typically impulse purchases. 

Demand Forecast 
The market for organised snacks in India is estimated to grow at about 14.6% CAGR, between 2016 and 2021. Some of the segments such as 
chips,  other  savoury  and  snacks  (nuts  and  popcorn) are  expected  to  witness  only  moderate  growth  of  about  9-10%  as  they  have  already 
reached maturity with limited scope for new offerings. The market for namkeen is expected to witness the highest growth, at about 17.8% 
between 2016 and 2021. Shift from unorganised sector to the organised sector, and increasing penetration in Southern and Eastern markets 
will be the key driving factors for this market. Companies have responded to this growth by enhancing their production capacities across the 
country. 

India Organised Snacks Market – Demand Forecast: 2016-2021, by Value (Rs. billion) 

In the organised snacks segment the market has been historically dominated by major FMCG companies such as PepsiCo, ITC, Parle Products, 
etc. PepsiCo, with its Lays’ and Kurkure brand has dominated the chips and extruded snacks market with close to 50% market share in each 
of  the  segments.  A  large  portfolio  of  products,  innovative  flavours,  and  regular  new  product  launches,  aggressive  advertisements  and 
promotions, celebrity endorsements, and large retailer margins have been instrumental in PepsiCo gaining dominance in these categories. 

In addition to these larger players, the last four to five years have witnessed the aggressive growth of medium sized companies such as Balaji 
Wafers and Prataap Snacks. Balaji Wafers was started in Western India and in spite of being no match to PepsiCo in spending, has been able 
to dominate the market for chips in the region, with more than 60% market share. Balaji Wafers has been expanding beyond the Western 
markets to the North Indian market as well. 

In terms of revenues, Prataap Snacks is one of the top six companies of 2016. It has a strong presence in Northern and Western markets and 
is increasing penetration in the Southern markets as well. Prataap Snacks is the market leader in the rings segment (part of extruded snacks), 
and its share in the overall organised snacks market has grown from 1% to 4% from 2010 to 2016. Being a pan-India player, Prataap Snacks 
has seen high growth over the last few years and has successfully garnered market share from larger companies such as PepsiCo and ITC. 
With capacity expansion plans aimed at reaching newer geographies, the dominant position of leading snack companies will be challenged 
over the course of the next four to five years. 

Analysis of Extruded Snacks Market in India 
Extrusion technologies have an important role in the food industry as an efficient manufacturing process. The products developed by this 
process are known as extruded snacks and they differ in colour, shape, and aroma. Extruded food products are mainly corn flour and potato-
based but a combination of flours can also be used. Fast-paced lifestyle, high disposable income, rising urbanisation, and transforming food 
culture have attributed to the growth and demand of the Indian snacks market, including extruded snacks. Northern and Western India are 
the  largest  markets  for  extruded  snacks.  Both  these  regions  also  witness  the  largest  competition  in  both  the  organised  and  unorganised 
segments.  Small  pack  size  is  imperative  to  push  sales  volumes,  especially  in  the  rural  markets,  where  penetration  is  minimal.  Even  in 
extruded snacks, the products that are sold across the various regions vary depending on what is native to the region and the typical flavours 
enjoyed. 

One of the key varieties of extruded snacks is rings. This includes corn rings and accounts for about  8%-10% of the total extruded snacks 
market. This segment is totally targeted at children and the corn rings packs are usually packed with toys. Corn-based extruded snacks are of 
various types. But the most common one would be the puffed variety. Variants such as cheese balls, cheese puffs, and spicy corn puffs are 
popular. Fryums are also a popular category in the market, with a large presence of unorganised players. 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
India Organised Extruded Snacks Market – Demand Forecast: 2016-2021, Value (Rs. million) 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

The demand for extruded snacks in the organised market is expected to increase at a CAGR of 15% over the next five years. An increasing 
young population, the demand for multiple snacking items and flavours, increasing disposable income and the influence of social media, are 
some of the major factors that are driving this growth. With the trend pointing towards increasing organised retail, a similar effect can also 
be witnessed in extruded snacks. Similarly, medium-sized players will compete aggressively with global players to gain market share. Large 
players such as PepsiCo and ITC are likely to build on their R&D and supply chain strengths to retain their dominant position. 

PepsiCo is the market leader with a 44% value share in 2016 with their 15-year-old brand Kurkure. However, the dominance of PepsiCo has 
been challenged by companies such as Prataap Snacks, Balaji Wafers and DFM Foods. These companies are strong in certain regional pockets 
though having a wider presence, and offer better prices than the major companies to increase penetration across the country. The presence 
of  such  players  is  high  in  Western  India  indicating  the  level  of  competition  in  the  region.  By  expanding  their  product  portfolio  and 
penetrating newer markets, these companies have been garnering market shares from major players over the last two to three years and 
witnessing high growth over the last few years. Prataap Snacks became the market leader in rings (extruded snacks) with its product Rings in 
2015 and continue to remain so in 2016, followed by DFM Foods with its product Crax. Medium-sized companies, including Prataap Snacks 
and SM Foods, have been moving towards expanding across the entire country and challenging the large companies. Smaller companies are 
usually confined to a city or a few cities in a region. 

Analysis of Chips Market in India 
Chips are one of the largest segments in the Indian snacks market. There are a large number of players in the market operating at a national 
level as well as in the regional level. In addition to packaged chips, there is a notable market for fresh chips (not covered under this study). In 
addition to potato chips, tapioca chips and banana chips are the top varieties present in the market. Potato is the most popular variety and 
accounts for more than 90% of the total chips market. 

Potato chips are the most common type of chips in the market being the core product of all chips manufacturers. Some companies such as 
Balaji Wafers,  MTR, etc. have options such as banana  chips. Other varieties  such as tapioca, carrot, etc. are produced majorly by smaller 
companies  that  have  regional  presence.  The  unbranded  market  for  chips  boasts  of  a  larger  variety  of  chips  and  is  mostly  manufactured 
freshly and sold. While the chips market in India has been growing at about 17-19% over the last five years in the organised segment, it has 
been losing share to traditional Indian snacks over the last two to three years. The effort associated with procuring and processing potatoes 
offers slim margin to manufacturers, who are increasingly looking at namkeen and extruded snacks to optimize margins. 

Similar  to  the  other  snack  segments,  the  market  for  chips  is  also  highly  unorganised  and  fragmented;  the  main  difference  being  chips  is 
already a mature market in India. Even in the organised market, many players are restricted to certain regions or cities, while big players 
have a larger reach. While the unorganised segment dominates the market, a move toward a more organised industry structure is expected 
in the future. With increasing urbanisation, exposure to various cultures and tastes, the consumer is becoming increasingly demanding and 
only  companies  that  play  in  the  organised  segment  will  possess  the  capabilities  to  continuously  innovate  to  satisfy  consumer  demands. 
Furthermore, companies that play in the organised segment are perceived as healthier and hygienic in comparison to the unorganised ones. 
Additionally, the colourful and  multi-layer packaging seen in branded products is both attractive and retains freshness when compared to 
products  sold  by  the  unorganised  players.  Hence,  a  move  toward  a  more  organised  market  is  inevitable.  Majority  of  the  consumption  of 
chips  is  from  Northern  and  Western  India,  which  together  account  for  over  60%  of  the  market;  with  multiple  small  and  medium-sized 
companies operating in these markets, as well. A large number of chips manufacturers are based in Madhya Pradesh, from where they serve 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

Northern and Western markets, while some companies cater to the Eastern market as well. Potato chips are very popular in Northern and 
Western India, while South India sees a mixed demand for potato chips, tapioca chips and banana chips, with banana chips being particularly 
popular  in Kerala.  As taste  is the major factor that decides the  success of a  product, companies prefer to experiment  with local tastes in 
addition to standard flavours. Apart from packed chips, freshly made chips are also very popular in the South India. 

Traditional grocery shops are most commonly found in India, offering ease of access and quick shopping options. Usually, consumers visit 
these shops to buy daily essential food/ personal care products and tend to pick up chips. To support this impulse purchase, these shops 
stock the most popular products in the segment and usually the medium pack size. Traditional grocery stores dominate the market and will 
continue to do so. Shopping in hypermarkets and supermarkets has become common where consumers usually visit  for bulk purchase of 
products for the entire month. Hence, there is tendency to buy larger packs or a multi-pack product from there. Similarly, companies also 
sell niche flavours and new varieties more in supermarkets than in the traditional outlets as the consumers who frequent supermarkets are 
more likely to try new flavours or products.  While sales in malls will increase, it is not expected to be a  major channel over the next five 
years. 

Demand Forecast 
Since chips in the organised market make a fairly mature market, the demand is expected to grow at 10.4% over the next five years. Growth 
in the organised segment is expected to be more than the growth in the unorganised segment. The growing young population, influence of 
social media, and the liking for salty Indian snacks will continue to drive growth. Furthermore, companies offer new flavours and tastes so 
that consumers always have options; this will ensure sustainability. While the issue of health and wellness can dampen sales, suppliers do 
not think it will be a matter of concern and the effects of this could be low in the short to medium term. It will also pave way for healthier 
snacking  options  such  as  baked  and  multi-grain  products.  However,  retention  of  taste  while  making  the  snacks  healthier  is  a  challenge 
currently, even for bigger companies. 

Analysis of Namkeen Market in India 
Namkeen covers a  broad range of products that are traditionally consumed in India.  Most  of these products  were traditionally cooked at 
home and consumed. However, current lifestyles restrict the time available for such activities forcing consumers to purchase these products 
for  consumption.  This  has  resulted  in  the  Indian  market  experiencing  high  growth  over  the  last  few  years.  The  broad  range  of  products, 
availability of raw materials and higher margins are some of the key factors that deem this segment attractive. In response, many companies 
are adding more namkeen in their product portfolio. Moong Dal and Aloo Bhujia are the most popular products in the segments. Due to the 
varied eating habits across India, the preference for traditional snacks differs across the country. 

Since  most  of  the  namkeen  can  be  prepared  at  home  as  well  as  by  local  condiment  shops,  there  is  a  presence  of  a  large  unorganised 
segment in this market. With bigger players entering the fray, market consolidation and lower number of companies can be expected going 
forward. This trend can be noticed across the snacks market in India. North and West India are the major consumers of namkeen, especially 
Rajasthan and Gujarat where namkeen forms an integral part of their food habits. Hence, majority of the namkeen varieties originate from 
these regions. Namkeen in South India and Eastern India are markedly different in comparison. 

Due to  the large presence and location in residential areas, sale of namkeen products  has resultantly been predominant  in small  grocery 
shops. Petty shops that sell beverages and chocolates also stock namkeen products to a large extent and form a major avenue of sales for 
namkeen. With the advent of supermarkets and hypermarkets, larger SKU products are sold through these channels. As namkeen is enjoyed 
by the entire family, family-sized packs are also seeing more movement, especially in supermarkets and hypermarkets. Resealable packaging 
has also been instrumental in the sale of larger SKU packs in hypermarkets and supermarkets. 

Demand Forecast 
While the overall snacks market is witnessing healthy growth, the namkeen market stands out. The growth in this segment is the highest 
across  all  segments,  offering  higher  margins  resulting  in  more  competitors.  As  companies  compete  for  share  of  throat,  new  tastes,  new 
products  and  new  variations  of  traditional  products,  attractive  packaging  and  flexible  price  points  are  fuelling  the  high  growth  in  the 
namkeen  market.  A  high  growth  of  nearly  20%  over  the  next  four  to  five  years  is  forecasted.  The  growth  is  also  supported  by  the  large 
presence  of  the  unorganised  segment,  catering  to  unique  taste-requirements  in  each  region  and  ensuring  reach  to  even  the  most  rural 
markets. In the long run consolidation of the unorganised sector is expected. 

Analysis of the market for ‘Other Snacks’ in India 
Apart  from the popular  variety of snacks such as chips, extruded snacks and namkeen,  other formats such as nuts,  popcorns, and tortilla 
chips are also present in the market. Of these, nuts and popcorn have already been in consumption in India, while tortilla chips are a new 
product. Increasing exposure to media and a multi-cultural environment have been the key factors for entry of the product. The market for 
this category of  snacks has increased by 9% between 2012 and 2016.  The  market for other snacks is characterised by a  high  presence of 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

players in the unorganised sector. This is more so in the case of nuts and popcorn. The market for ready-to-cook popcorn has low presence 
of unorganised players. The market for tortilla chips is fairly consolidated now and there is no unorganised player in that segment due to its 
non-Indian origin. In terms of regional sales, similar to other snacks, Northern and Western India are the largest consumers. Southern and 
Eastern  India  show  moderate  levels  of  consumption.  However,  South  India  consumes  a  substantially  larger  amount  of  popcorn  when 
compared to nut-based snacks. Demand for tortilla chips is highest in North India followed by South India with the demand concentrated in 
urban markets. 

Due to large-scale consumption by a large section of the population, nuts and popcorn are available largely across all independent grocery 
stores. Additionally, medium and large packs are sold through supermarkets and hypermarkets targeting consumption as a family, similar to 
namkeen.  However,  tortilla  chips  are  predominantly  available  only  in  hypermarkets  and  supermarkets,  as  they  are  still  considered  as  a 
premium product and are more likely to be consumed by consumers frequenting supermarkets and hypermarkets. 

Demand Forecast 
The overall market is expected to witness average growth rates over the next few years, with limited scope of innovation and new product 
development  in  the  nuts  and  popcorn  category.  Coupled  with  the  pressure  from  namkeen  and  the  extruded  snacks  market,  a  growth  of 
around 9.2% is forecast between 2016 and 2021 in the organised segment. However, the demand for tortilla chips is expected to grow at 
about 38% over the next few years, as it is still in the nascent phase with increasing penetration into non-urban and rural markets. Attractive 
price points will be critical for penetrating rural markets and to increase sales overall. 

Overview of the packaged sweets industry in India 
The overall Indian traditional sweets market is estimated at over Rs. 3.8 billion in 2016 and is largely dominated by the unorganised players. 
Due to the integral role played by  sweets in Indian culture and festivities, the  market  or traditional Indian sweets is expected to grow at 
about  10%  over  the  next  few  years.  However,  there  is  an  increasing  preference  towards  western  sweets,  especially  chocolate-based 
confectionaries, due to changes in consumer preference, exposure to media and the internet, and increasing living standards. In addition, 
concerns related to hygiene and low quality due to lack of established processes to manufacture Indian sweets is also driving this shift. Most 
of the smaller sweet brands will struggle, while the larger brands have been able to capitalise on this by offering packed sweets that appeal 
to the consumers. The organised confectionary market in India is estimated at about Rs. 28 billion in 2016. The market for confectionaries is 
estimated to grow at about 15%-18% over the next four to five years driven primarily by chocolate confectionaries. 

With increase in demand of high-end confectionary, many global as well as domestic players are investing in the market. Primarily driven by 
the young age group, offering new taste/ flavours, promotional activities, attractive packaging, and free toys are some of the crucial factors 
that can ensure growth in the Indian market. 

Key Concerns  
Any actual or alleged contamination or deterioration of the products could damage the reputation of the company: PSL is subject to risks 
affecting  the  food  and  beverage  industry,  including  risks  posed  by  the  following:  contamination/  spoilage  of  raw  materials,  consumer 
product liability claims; product tampering;, product labelling errors, the expense and possible unavailability of product liability  insurance; 
and  the  potential  cost  and  disruption  of  product  recalls.  Any  actual  or  alleged  contamination  or  deterioration  of  the  products,  whether 
deliberate  or  accidental,  could  result  in  legal  liability,  damage  to  the  reputation  and  may  adversely  affect  the  business  prospects  and 
consequently  its  financial  performance.  The  risk  of  contamination  or  deterioration  exists  at  each  stage  of  the  production  cycle,  including 
during  the  production,  storage  and  delivery  of  raw  materials,  packaging,  storage  and  delivery  to  PSL’s  customers  and  the  storage  and 
shelving of its products by its super stockists, distributors and retailers until final consumption by consumers. Further, contamination of any 
of  its  products  could  also  subject  it  to  product  liability  claims,  adverse  publicity  and  government  scrutiny,  investigation  or  intervention, 
product return, resulting in increased costs and any of these events could have a material and adverse impact on its reputation, business, 
financial condition, cash flows, results of operations and prospects. 

Inadequate  or  interrupted  supply  and  price  fluctuation  of  raw  materials  and  packaging  materials  could  adversely  affect  the  business: 
Production quantity and cost of PSL’s products are dependent on its ability to source raw materials and packaging materials at acceptable 
prices, and maintain a stable and sufficient supply of its major raw materials. Its key raw materials include potatoes, oil, corn, rice, gram and 
major packaging materials include laminates, boxes and the toys it include in the packaging of some of its products. The raw materials it uses 
are subject to price volatility and unavailability caused by external conditions, such as commodity price fluctuations within India and globally, 
weather  conditions,  supply  and  demand  dynamics,  logistics  and  processing  costs,  its  bargaining  power  with  the  suppliers,  inflation  and 
governmental regulations and policies. PSL do not enter into long term contracts with any of the raw material suppliers and typically place 
orders with them in advance on the basis of its anticipated requirements. The absence of long term contracts at fixed prices  exposes it to 
volatility  in  the  prices  of  raw  materials  that  it  require  and  it  may  be  unable  to  pass  these  costs  onto  its  consumers.  Further,  if  all  or  a 
significant number of its suppliers for any particular raw material or packaging material are unable or unwilling to meet its requirements or 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

estimates fall short of the demand, it could suffer shortages or significant cost increases. Continued supply disruptions could exert pressure 
on PSL’s costs, and it cannot be assured that all or part of any increased costs can be passed along to its consumers in a timely manner or at 
all, which could negatively affect its business, overall profitability and financial performance. 

Operates in a highly competitive industry: PSL operates in India’s snack food industry and face strong competition. Competitive factors in 
the snack food industry include product quality, taste, price, brand awareness among consumers, advertising and promotion, innovation of 
products,  variety,  nutritional  content,  product  packaging  and  package  design.  Some  of  its  competitors  have  been  in  their  respective 
businesses longer than it has and may accordingly have substantially greater financial resources, wider distribution tie-ups, larger product 
portfolio,  technology,  research  and  development  capability,  and  greater  market  penetration.  Further,  its  competitors  in  certain  regional 
markets may also benefit from raw material sources or manufacturing facilities that are closer to these markets. Its ability to compete largely 
depends upon PSL’s direct marketing initiatives, promotional tie ups, quality and taste of its products, as well as leveraging  and engaging 
through  its  distribution  network.  Increased  competition  may  result  in  inability  to differentiate  its  products  from  those  of  its  competitors, 
which may lead to loss of market share. Its failure to compete effectively with its competitors may have an adverse impact on its business, 
results of operations, financial condition and future prospects. 

Failure to develop, launch and market new products due to unpredictable consumer preferences may have a material adverse effect on 
the  business:  The  snack  food  industry  in  India  is  highly  evolving  and  consumers  may  be  tempted  to  shift  their  choices  and  preferences 
whenever  new  products  are  launched  or  various  marketing  and  pricing  campaigns  of  different  brands  are  introduced.  Its  future  growth 
depends  on  its  ability  to  continue  to  introduce  new  products,  flavours  and  packaging,  and  to  advertise  and  market  them  effectively.  Its 
success  in  marketing  existing  products  and  new  products  depends  on  the  ability  to  adapt  to  a  rapidly  changing  marketing  and  media 
environment,  including  increasing  reliance  on  direct  promotional  initiatives,  advertising  through  hoardings  in  key  geographies  as  well  as 
through  television  and  radio advertisements.  Further,  any  adverse  development  relating  to  celebrities  or  television  characters  that  PSL  is 
associated with, may also adversely affect the brand and consequently the sale of its products. If it do not successfully maintain, extend and 
expand its reputation and brand image, then its brands, product sales, financial condition and results of operations could be materially and 
adversely affected. 

Failure to effectively manage future growth and expansion may have a material adverse effect on business prospects and future financial 
performance:  PSL’s  future  growth  depends,  amongst  other  factors,  on  establishing  new  manufacturing  facilities,  expanding  its  existing 
production  capacity,  and  introducing  new  products.  In  line  with  its  business  strategy,  it  intends  to  deepen  its  presence  in  its  existing 
territories in North Zone and West  Zone particularly in the states of Rajasthan, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh and the relatively  newer South 
Zone market. Further, it also plans to expand its operations in selective markets abroad. Its future growth also depends on expanding sales 
and  distribution  network  to  enter  new  markets  in  new  geographies,  through  different  sales  channels.  PSL  faces  increased  risks  when  it 
enters  new  markets,  either  India  or  abroad.  Its  expansion  plans  and  business  growth  could  strain  managerial,  operational  and  financial 
resources. PSL’s ability to manage future growth will depend on its ability to continue to implement and improve operational, financial and 
management information systems on a timely basis and to expand, train, motivate and manage its workforce. It cannot be assured that its 
personnel, systems, procedures and controls will be adequate to support its future growth. Failure to effectively manage its  expansion may 
lead to increased costs and reduced profitability and may adversely affect its growth prospects. There can be no assurance that it will be 
able to achieve its business strategy of expanding into existing or new territories and expanding its product portfolio. 

Business  prospects  and  results  of  operations  may  be  adversely  affected  if  any  future  capacity  expansion  plans  is  not  successfully 
implemented: PSL intends to use a portion of the Net Proceeds towards expansion and modernization of its manufacturing facilities. With 
respect  to  Extruded  Snacks,  it  proposes  to  expand  the  packaging  line  at  its  manufacturing  facility  at  Guwahati-II  and  at  its  contract 
manufacturing facility at Bengaluru and modernize the packaging line at its manufacturing facility at Indore. Further, it propose to set up a 
new production line and a packaging line at its manufacturing facility at Indore for Chips and Namkeen. It also proposes to upgrade ETP and 
construct a building at its manufacturing facility at Indore. A delay in the construction, commissioning or operation of future product lines, 
an increase in the cost of construction or future manufacturing facilities not being as efficient as planned could have a material and adverse 
effect on its business and results of operations. In addition, PSL may have to make significant investment in upgrading its plant, machinery 
and other infrastructure at its manufacturing facilities. Its projected requirements for infrastructure investments may also vary from actual 
levels  if  anticipated  sales  growth  does  not  materialize  or  varies  significantly  from  its  projections.  Significant  changes  from  its  expected 
returns on manufacturing facility equipment, technology support systems and supply chain infrastructure investments could adversely affect 
the results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. 

Inability to expand or effectively manage growing  super stockists and distribution network or any disruptions in supply or distribution 
infrastructure may have an adverse effect on business, results of operations and financial condition: PSL rely largely on third-party super 
stockists and distributors to sell its products to retailers who place its products in the market. As of June 30, 2017,  its distribution network 
included 218 super stockists and over 3,500 distributors. Its ability to expand and grow product reach significantly depends on the reach and 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

effective  management  of  its  distribution  network.  PSL  continuously  seeks  to  increase  the  penetration  of  its  products  by  appointing  new 
super stockists to ensure wide distribution network targeted at different consumer groups and regions.  It cannot be assured that it will be 
able to successfully identify or appoint new super stockists or effectively manage its existing distribution network. The super stockists place 
bulk orders with it after aggregating orders from various distributors. As PSL sells and distributes its products through such super stockists 
and distributors, any one of the following events could cause fluctuations or declines in its revenue and could have an adverse effect on the 
financial condition, cash flows and results of operations: 
 
failure to renew agreements with super stockists; 
 
failure to maintain relationships with existing super stockists; 
 
failure to establish relationships with new super stockists on favorable terms; 
 
inability to timely identify and appoint additional or replacement super stockists upon the loss of one or more of super stockists; 
  reduction, delay or cancellation of orders from one or more of super stockists or distributors; and 
  disruption in delivering of products by super stockists and/or distributors. 

Any disruption in the supply chain could have an adverse impact on the business, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations: 
PSL’s ability to manufacture, transport, and sell its products is critical to its success. Any disputes with its super stockists, including disputes 
regarding pricing or performance, could adversely affect the ability to supply products to its customers and could materially and adversely 
affect the product sales, financial condition, and results of operations. In addition, any damage or disruption to PSL’s supply chain, including 
third-party  manufacturing  or  transportation  and  distribution  capabilities,  due  to  weather,  natural  disaster,  fire  or  explosion,  terrorism, 
pandemics, strikes, government action, or other reasons beyond its control or the control of its super stockists, could impair the ability to 
manufacture or sell its products. Failure to take adequate steps to mitigate the likelihood or potential impact of such events or to effectively 
manage such events if they occur could adversely affect the business or financial results. 

Termination of agreements with contract manufacturing facilities may adversely affect the business, results of operations and financial 
condition:  PSL  has  engaged  two  facilities  on  contract  manufacturing  basis,  located  at  Bengaluru,  Karnataka  and  at  Kolkata,  West  Bengal. 
Although a majority of its revenue is generated from sale of products manufactured at its  owned manufacturing facilities, it also generates 
considerable revenue from these third party contract manufacturing facilities. PSL also intend to use a portion of the Net Proceeds to expand 
and modernize its production capabilities at the Bengaluru contract manufacturing facility to cater to its growth and expansion plans. Any 
non-renewal or termination of its agreement with the Bengaluru contract manufacturing facility could adversely affect the utilization of Net 
Proceeds  and  its  strategy  for  such  expansion.  Any  non-renewal  or  termination  of  its  arrangement  with  any  of  these  third  party  contract 
manufacturing  facilities  will  adversely  affect  the  sales  and  revenue  from  operations.  Further,  if  PSL  is  unable  to  suitably  replace  its 
arrangement with another third party contract manufacturing facility or are unable to provide adequate supply in the affected territory,  it 
may lose market share in such territory, which could materially affect the revenue from operations. 

Any significant interruption in continuing operations of production or cold storage facilities could have a material adverse effect on the 
business: PSL owned and operated three manufacturing facilities and also engaged two facilities on a contract manufacturing basis and a 
cold storage facility on lease basis. These facilities are subject to the normal risks of industrial production, including equipment breakdowns, 
labour  stoppages,  natural  disasters,  directives  from  government  agencies,  water  shortages  and  power  interruptions.  Any  significant 
malfunction or breakdown of its machinery may entail significant repair and maintenance costs and cause delays in its operations. Certain of 
its  raw  materials  are  perishable  products  and  consequently,  any  malfunction  and  break  down  of  the  cold  storage  facility  may  affect  the 
stored potatoes, which have a limited shelf life, and this, along with any significant impact on other raw materials could result in slow down 
or cessation of its operations which may adversely affect the business and prospects.  

Certain  aspects  of  the  business,  including  procurement  of  raw  materials  and  availability  of  target  consumer  segments  are  seasonal  in 
nature.: PSL is largely dependent on the agricultural industry for almost all of its raw materials including potatoes, rice, corn and gram. The 
agricultural  industry  is  largely  dependent  on  various  factors  including  monsoon  and  weather  conditions.  Any  vagaries  of  weather  and 
abnormal monsoon may affect crop production, destroy crops and subsequently increase the prices of its raw materials which can have an 
adverse  effect  on  is  results  of  operations.  In  addition,  children  and  younger  consumers  represent  a  significant  proportion  of  consumer 
segment.  Although  the  demand  for  its  products  is  continuous  throughout  the  year,  it  observe  slight  reduction  in  its  sales  during  school 
holidays, especially for its products focused on young consumers. If it is unable to supply sufficient quantity of its products in the market or if 
for any other reason, including transport strikes or bad weather conditions, its supply is interrupted in such period; its results of operations 
may be adversely affected. 

A shortage or non-availability of electricity, gas or water may adversely affect manufacturing Operations: PSL’s manufacturing operations 
require a significant amount and continuous supply of electricity, gas and water and any shortage or non-availability may adversely affect its 
operations. Particularly, all of its manufacturing facilities require a significant amount and continuous supply of electricity and gas and any 
shortage or non-availability of electricity and gas may adversely affect the operations. Any failure on its part to obtain alternate sources  of 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

electricity, gas or water, in a timely fashion, and at an acceptable cost, may have an adverse effect on its business, results of operations and 
financial condition. 

Any  loss  of  business  or  potential  adverse  publicity  resulting  from  spurious  or  imitation  products,  could  result  in  loss  of  goodwill  for 
products: PSL is exposed to the risk that entities in India and elsewhere could pass off their products as its products, including spurious or 
imitation products. For example, products imitating its brands and packaging material selling spurious products may adversely affect sale of 
its  products,  resulting  in  a  decrease  in  market  share  resulting  from  a  decrease  in  demand  for  its  products.  Such  imitation  or  spurious 
products  may  not  only  result  in  loss  of  sales  but  also  adversely  affect  the  reputation  of  the  products  and  consequently  future  sales  and 
results of operations. The proliferation of spurious and imitation products in PSL’s territories and sub-territories, and the time and resources 
utilized in taking action against such spurious products, defending claims and complaints regarding these spurious products, and in initiating 
appropriate legal proceedings against offenders who infringe its intellectual property rights, could result in lower sales, and adversely affect 
the  results  of  operations  and  may  have  a  material  and  adverse  effect  on  its  reputation,  business,  prospects,  results  of  operations  and 
financial condition. 

Business is subject to changes in consumer taste, preferences, perceptions and spending patterns: PSL’s business depends substantially on 
factors  such  as  consumer  preferences  and  tastes,  consumer  income,  consumer  perceptions  of,  and  confidence  in,  its  product  safety  and 
quality, and consumer awareness of health issues, all of which affect consumer spending patterns. A decline in the demand for its products 
could occur as a result of a change in any of the factors described above at any time, and its future success will depend partly on the ability 
to  anticipate,  identify  or  adapt  to  such  changes  and  to  timely  implement  new  advertising  and  promotion  strategies  that  can  attract 
consumers  to  its  products.  It  cannot  be  assured  that  it  will  be  able  to  adapt  its  product  portfolio  to  changes  in  food  trends  or  shifts  in 
consumer preferences and tastes. It may not be able to introduce new products that are in faster-growing and more profitable categories or 
reduce its production of products in categories experiencing consumption declines. Additionally, trends and shifts in consumer preferences 
and tastes may apply downward pressure on sales and pricing or lead to increased levels of selling and promotional expenses. Any of these 
factors could have a material adverse impact on its financial condition and results of operations 

Stringent  food  safety,  consumer  goods,  health  and  safety  laws  and  regulations  may  result  in  increased  liabilities  and  increased  capital 
expenditures: PSL’s operations are subject to stringent health and safety laws as its products are for human consumption and are therefore 
subject to various industry specific regulations. It may also be subject to additional regulatory requirements due to changes in governmental 
policies. Further, it may also incur additional costs and liabilities related to compliance with these laws and regulations that are an inherent 
part of its business. These laws and regulations are increasingly becoming stringent and may in the future create substantial compliance or 
remediation  liabilities  and  costs.  These  laws  may  impose  liability  for  non-compliance,  regardless  of  fault.  Other  laws  may  require  the 
company to investigate and remediate contamination at its facilities and production processes. While it intends to comply with applicable 
regulatory requirements, it is possible that such compliance may prove restrictive, costly and onerous and an inability to comply with such 
regulatory requirement may attract penalty. 

Inability to obtain, maintain or renew requisite statutory and regulatory permits and approvals for business operations could materially 
and  adversely  affect  the  business,  prospects,  results  of  operations  and  financial  condition:  PSL’s  operations  are  subject  to  extensive 
government  regulation  and  in  respect  of  its  existing  operations  it  is  required  to  obtain  and  maintain  various  statutory  and  regulatory 
permits, certificates and approvals including  approvals under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, environmental approvals, factories licenses, labour related and tax related approvals. There can be no assurance that 
the  relevant  authorities  will  issue  or  renew  any  expired  permits  or  approvals  in  time  or  at  all.  Failure  or  delay  in  obtaining  approvals  or 
failure  by  the  company  to  obtain,  maintain  or  renew  the  required  permits  or  approvals  within  applicable  time  or  at  all  may  result  in 
interruption  of  its  operations.  Further,  the  relevant  authorities  may  initiate  penal  action  against  it,  restrain  its  operations,  impose 
fines/penalties or initiate legal proceedings for its inability to renew/obtain approvals in a timely manner or at all. Consequently, failure or 
delay to obtain such approvals could have a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition and profitability. 

PSL may not  be able to adequately protect  its intellectual property that  is material to  the  business: PSL’s ability to compete effectively 
depends in part upon protection of its rights in trademarks, copyrights and other intellectual property rights it owns. Further, other entities 
may  pass  off  their  products  as  its  by  imitating  its  brand  name  or  packaging  material.  Its  use  of  contractual  provisions,  confidentiality 
procedures and agreements, and trademark, copyright, unfair competition, trade secret and other laws to protect its intellectual property 
may not be adequate. Litigation may be necessary to enforce intellectual property rights and protect proprietary  information, or to defend 
against claims by third parties that its products or its use of intellectual property infringe their intellectual property rights. Any litigation or 
claims brought by or against it could result in substantial costs and diversion of its resources. A successful claim of trademark, copyright or 
other intellectual property infringement against it could prevent it from providing its products, which could harm the business, financial 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

condition or results of operations. In addition, a breakdown in PSL’s internal policies and procedures may lead to an unintentional disclosure 
of  its  proprietary,  confidential  or  material  non-public  information,  which  could  in  turn harm  thebusiness,  financial  condition  or  results  of 
operations. 

Concerns over obesity or nutritional value of products may reduce demand for some of the Products: There is growing concern among 
consumers,  public  health  professionals  and  government  agencies  about  the  health  problems  associated  with  obesity.  In  addition,  some 
researchers,  health  advocates  and  dietary  guidelines  are  suggesting  that  consumption  of  fried  snacks  is  one  of  the  primary  causes  of 
increased  obesity  rates  and  are  encouraging  consumers  to  reduce  or  eliminate  consumption  of  such  products.  Increasing  public  concern 
about  obesity; additional governmental regulations concerning the marketing, labelling, packaging or sale of PSL’s products;  and negative 
publicity resulting from actual or threatened legal actions against it or other companies in its industry relating to the marketing, labelling or 
sale of its fried snacks may reduce demand for or increase the cost of its fried snacks, which could adversely affect the profitability. 

Profit & Loss  
Particulars 
Revenue from Operations 
Other Income 
Total Income 
Total Expenditure 
Purchase of traded goods 
Increase / (decrease) in inventories of traded goods 
Cost of raw material and components consumed 
Employee benefits expense 
Other expenses 
PBIDT 
Interest 
PBDT 
Depreciation 
PBT 
Exceptional items 
Tax (incl. DT & FBT) 
Tax 
Deferred Tax 
Adj. Profit  
EPS (Rs.) on pre IPO fully diluted capital 
Equity 
Face Value 
OPM (%) 
PATM (%) 

                                                              Rs in million 
FY14 
4456.2 
12.3 
4468.5 
4254.6 
162.0 
14.7 
3107.6 
89.4 
880.9 
213.8 
47.3 
166.6 
116.8 
49.8 
0.0 
-4.0 
0.0 
-4.0 
53.8 
2.50 
14.6 
5.0 
4.5 
1.2 

FY16 
7571.9 
7.1 
7579.0 
7006.7 
263.7 
-17.8 
4975.7 
187.4 
1597.7 
572.3 
58.8 
513.5 
179.9 
333.6 
58.0 
1.9 
7.1 
-5.2 
273.7 
12.80 
14.7 
5.0 
7.5 
3.6 

FY15 
5588.1 
17.6 
5605.7 
5249.4 
247.9 
-16.1 
3808.1 
137.3 
1072.3 
356.3 
63.3 
293.0 
153.4 
139.7 
9.6 
31.0 
0.0 
31.0 
99.0 
4.60 
14.7 
5.0 
6.1 
1.8 

FY17 
9039.2 
15.4 
9054.6 
8630.5 
212.9 
-39.3 
6192.6 
252.7 
2011.7 
424.1 
44.8 
379.2 
249.9 
129.4 
0.0 
30.5 
0.5 
29.9 
98.9 
4.64 
30.61 
5.0 
4.5 
1.1 

Balance Sheet:     

                                                                                                         Rs in million 

Particulars 
Equity & Liabilities 
Shareholders Funds 
Share Capital 
Reserves and surplus 
Non-Current Liabilities 
Long-term borrowings 
Deferred tax liabilities 
Long-term provisions 
Current Liabilities 
Short-term borrowings 
total outstanding dues of creditors other than micro enterprises and small enterprises 
Other current liabilities 
Short term provisions 
Total Equity & Liabilities 

Assets 
Non-Current Assets 
Property, Plant and Equipment 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

FY17 

FY16 

FY15 

FY14 

2383.4 
30.61 
2,352.82 
491.3 
388.51 
85.92 
16.91 
1397.0 
267.54 
772.78 
353.93 
2.73 
4271.8 

2172.3 
14.7 
2157.7 
276.0 
210.4 
55.3 
10.3 
965.7 
264.2 
552.1 
147.8 
1.5 
3414.0 

1896.1 
14.7 
1881.4 
145.4 
79.0 
60.4 
6.1 
949.8 
241.9 
497.0 
210.2 
0.7 
2991.3 

1772.8 
14.6 
1758.1 
197.4 
165.3 
29.4 
2.7 
828.7 
218.4 
398.8 
211.1 
0.4 
2798.8 

2994.5 
1,931.62 

2389.3 
1678.0 

2133.7 
1572.3 

1864.3 
1430.8 

P a g e  | 13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intangible assets 
Capital work in progress 
Intangible assets under development 
Deferred tax assets (net) 
Loans and advances 
Other non-current assets 
Current Assets  
Inventories 
Trade receivables 
Cash and bank balances 
Loans and advances 
Other current assets 
Total Assets 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

76.54 
518.04 
0.12 
0.78 
454.69 
12.71 
1277.3 
788.68 
196.93 
110.5 
119.89 
61.25 
4271.8 

3.6 
303.1 
0.1 
0.1 
401.9 
2.4 
1024.7 
685.3 
182.9 
60.5 
80.4 
15.6 
3414.0 

4.0 
244.8 
0.1 
0.0 
309.7 
2.7 
857.7 
576.5 
136.3 
36.9 
98.3 
9.7 
2991.3 

3.2 
149.0 
0.1 
0.0 
278.0 
3.3 
934.5 
522.5 
116.0 
217.6 
67.5 
11.0 
2798.8 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RETAIL RESEARCH 

HDFC securities Limited, I Think Techno Campus, Building  - B, "Alpha", Office Floor 8, Near Kanjurmarg Station, Opp. Crompton Greaves, Kanjurmarg (East), 
Mumbai 400 042 Phone: (022) 3075 3400 Fax: (022) 2496 5066 Compliance Officer: Binkle R. Oza Email: complianceofficer@hdfcsec.com Phone: (022) 3045 3600 

HDFC Securities Limited (HSL) is a SEBI Registered Research Analyst having registration no. INH000002475.  

Disclaimer:  
This report has been prepared by HDFC Securities Ltd and is meant for sole use by the recipient and not for  circulation. The information and opinions contained 
herein  have  been  compiled  or  arrived  at,  based  upon  information  obtained  in  good  faith  from  sources  believed  to  be  reliable.  Such  information  has  not  been 
independently  verified  and  no  guaranty,  representation  of  warranty,  express  or  implied,  is  made  as  to  its  accuracy,  completeness  or  correctness.  All  such 
information and opinions are subject to change without notice. This document is for information purposes only. Descriptions of any company or companies or their 
securities mentioned herein are not intended to be complete and this document is not, and should not be construed as an offer or solicitation of an offer, to buy or 
sell any securities or other financial instruments.  
This report is not directed to, or intended for display, downloading, printing, reproducing or for distribution to or use by, any person or entity who is a citizen or 
resident or located in any locality, state, country or other jurisdiction where such distribution, publication, reproduction, availability or use would be contrary to 
law or regulation or what would subject HSL or its affiliates to any registration or licensing requirement within such jurisdiction.  
If this report is inadvertently send or has reached any individual in such country, especially, USA, the same may be ignored and brought to the attention of the 
sender. This document may not be reproduced, distributed or published for any purposes without prior written approval of HSL.  
Foreign currencies denominated securities, wherever mentioned, are subject to exchange rate fluctuations, which could have an adverse effect on their value or 
price,  or  the  income  derived  from  them.  In  addition,  investors  in  securities  such  as  ADRs,  the  values  of  which  are  influenced  by  foreign  currencies  effectively 
assume currency risk.  
It should not be considered to be taken as an offer to sell or a solicitation to buy any security. HSL may from time to time solicit from, or perform broking, or other 
services for, any company mentioned in this mail and/or its attachments. 
HSL and its affiliated company(ies), their directors and employees may; (a) from time to time, have a long or short position in, and buy or sell the securities of the 
company(ies) mentioned herein or (b) be engaged in any other transaction involving such securities and earn brokerage or other compensation or act as a market 
maker  in  the  financial  instruments  of  the  company(ies)  discussed  herein  or  act  as  an  advisor  or  lender/borrower  to  such  company(ies)  or  may  have  any  other 
potential conflict of interests with respect to any recommendation and other related information and opinions. 
HSL, its directors, analysts or employees do not take any responsibility, financial or otherwise, of the losses or the damages sustained due to the investments made 
or any action taken on basis of this report, including but not restricted to, fluctuation in the prices of shares and bonds, changes in the currency rates, diminution in 
the NAVs, reduction in the dividend or income, etc. 
HSL and other group companies, its directors, associates, employees may have various positions in any of the stocks, securities and financial instruments dealt in 
the report, or may make sell  or purchase or other deals in these securities from time to time or may deal in other securities  of the companies / organizations 
described in this report. 

HSL  or  its  associates  might  have  managed  or  co-managed  public  offering  of  securities  for  the  subject  company  or  might  have  been  mandated  by  the  subject 
company for any other assignment in the past twelve months.  
HSL or its associates might have received any compensation from the companies mentioned in the report during the period preceding twelve months from t date 
of this report for services in respect of managing or co-managing public offerings, corporate finance, investment banking or merchant banking, brokerage services 
or other advisory service in a merger or specific transaction in the normal course of business. 
HSL or its analysts did not receive any compensation or other benefits from the companies mentioned in the report or third party in connection with preparation of 
the research report. Accordingly, neither HSL nor Research Analysts have any material conflict of interest at the time of publication of this report. Compensation of 
our Research Analysts is not based on any specific merchant banking, investment banking or brokerage service transactions. HSL may have issued other reports 
that are inconsistent with and reach different conclusion from the information presented in this report.  
Research entity has not been engaged in market making activity for the subject company. Research analyst has not served as an officer, director or employee of 
the subject company. We have not received any compensation/benefits from the subject company or third party in connection with the Research Report. 

This report is intended for non-Institutional Clients only. The views and opinions expressed in this report may at times be contrary to or not in consonance with 
those of Institutional Research or PCG Research teams of HDFC Securities Ltd. and/or may have different time horizons. 

HDFC  Securities  Limited,  SEBI  Reg.  No.:  NSE-INB/F/E  231109431,  BSE-INB/F  011109437,  AMFI  Reg.  No.  ARN:  13549,  PFRDA  Reg.  No.  POP:  04102015,  IRDA 
Corporate Agent License No.: HDF 2806925/HDF C000222657, SEBI Research Analyst Reg. No.: INH000002475, CIN - U67120MH2000PLC152193 

Disclaimer: HDFC Bank (a shareholder in HDFC Securities Ltd) is associated with this issue in the capacity of, Lender Bank , and monitoring agency and will earn fees 
for its services. This report is prepared in the normal course, solely upon information generally available to the public. No representation is made that it is accurate 
or complete. Notwithstanding that HDFC Bank is acting for Prataap Snacks Ltd, this report is not issued with the authority of  Prataap Snacks Ltd. Readers of this 
report are advised to take an informed decision on the issue after independent verification and analysis. 

RETAIL RESEARCH 

P a g e  | 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
